CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF
SPRINGFIELD, OHIO
Local legislation current through April 7, 2020
State legislation current through March 20, 2019
 
DISCLAIMER
   The Codified Ordinances and other documents that appear in this Folio Infobase
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.  The
Codified Ordinances are provided for informational purposes only and should not be
relied upon as the definitive authority for local legislation.  Additionally, the
formatting and pagination of the posted documents vary from the formatting and
pagination of the official copy.  The official printed copy of the Codified
Ordinances should be consulted prior to any action being taken. 
   For further information regarding the official version of any portion of the
Codified Ordinances in this Folio Infobase, please contact the Municipality
directly.
 
CONTENTS
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD, OHIO
      
CHARTER
      
PART ONE -          Administrative Code
      
PART THREE -       Traffic Code
      
PART FIVE -       General Offenses Code
      
PART SEVEN -       Business Regulation Code
      
PART NINE -       Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code
      
PART ELEVEN -       Zoning Code
      
PART TWELVE      Subdivision Regulations
      
PART THIRTEEN -      Building Code
 
      
PART FIFTEEN -       Fire Prevention Code
 
      
PART SEVENTEEN -   Health Code
 
 
 
 
THE CHARTER
 
OF THE
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, OHIO
_OLE5BF279A91B37E214154-img
All Amendments through June 2002
Editor’s Notations added December 2016
 
   EDITOR'S NOTE:  The Springfield Charter was originally adopted onAugust 26,
1913, and was most recently adopted on November 2, 1965.  Dates appearing in
parentheses following a section heading indicate that those provisions were
subsequently amended, enacted, or repealed on the date given.
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS
   
Sec. 1.      Incorporation.
   
Sec. 2.      Form of Government.
   
Sec. 3.      Powers of the City.
 
ARTICLE II - THE CITY COMMISSION
   
Sec. 4.      Number; Selection; Term.  (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 5.      Qualifications. (8-7-01)
   
Sec. 6.      Salary; Bond; Penalty for Absence.
   
Sec. 7.      Presiding Officer; Mayor.  (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 8.      Powers.
   
Sec. 9.      Appointment of City Manager.
   
Sec. 10.   Removal of City Manager.
   
Sec. 11.   Vacancies in the offices of Mayor or City Commission. (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 12.   Creation of New Departments; Change of Duties.
   
Sec. 13.   City Clerk.
   
Sec. 14.   Meetings of the City Commission.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 15.   Special Meetings.
   
Sec. 16.   Rules of Procedure; Journal.  (5-8-90)
   
Sec. 17.   Ordinances.
   
Sec. 18.   Ordinance Enactment.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 19.   Emergency Measures.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 20.   Record and Publication.  (11-8-77)
 
ARTICLE III - THE CITY MANAGER
   
Sec. 21.   Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 22.   Absence of City Manager.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 23.   Administrative Departments.
 
ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS
   
Sec. 24.   Time of Holding Elections.
   
Sec. 25.   Ballots.
   
Sec. 26.   Petitions for Places on Primary Ballot.  (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 27.   Acceptance.
   
Sec. 28.   Election.  (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 29.   Primary.  (5-7-02)
 
ARTICLE V - TAXATION
   
Sec. 30.   Taxation of Income.  (11-8-83)
   
Sec. 31.   Tax Limit.
 
ARTICLE VI - FINANCE
   
Sec. 32.   The Estimate.
   
Sec. 33.   Appropriation Ordinance.
   
Sec. 34.   Transfer of Funds.
   
Sec. 35.   Unencumbered Balances.
   
Sec. 36.   Payment of Claims.
   
Sec. 37.   Certification of Funds.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 38.   Money in the Fund.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 39.   Financial Report.
   
Sec. 40.   Assessments.
   
Sec. 41.   Improvements by Direct Labor.
   
Sec. 42.   Expenditures Requiring City Commission Authorization.  (11-6-90)
   
Sec. 43.   Time of Making Contracts.
   
Sec. 44.   Modification of Contracts.
   
Sec. 45.   Mandatory Bidding  (11-6-90)
   
Sec. 46.   Contracts; When Void.
 
ARTICLE VII - CIVIL SERVICE
   
Sec. 47.   Civil Service Commission.  (11-4-97)
 
ARTICLE VIII - INITIATIVE
   
Sec. 48.   Proposal Petition.
   
Sec. 49.   Time of Filing.
   
Sec. 50.   Petition for Election.
   
Sec. 51.   Time of Holding Election.
   
Sec. 52.   Accepted Voting Device.
   
Sec. 53.   Amendments and Repeals.
 
ARTICLE IX - REFERENDUM
   
Sec. 54.   Petition for Referendum.  (11-8-77)
   
Sec. 55.   Proceedings Thereunder.
   
Sec. 56.   Referendum on Initiated Ordinances; Conflict.
   
Sec. 57.   Emergency Measures.
   
Sec. 58.   Preliminary Action.
 
ARTICLE X - RECALL
   
Sec. 59.   Recall Petition.
   
Sec. 60.   Notice.
   
Sec. 61.   Recall Election.
   
Sec. 62.   Voting Devices.
   
Sec. 63.   Filling of Vacancies.
   
Sec. 64.   Counting the Vote.
   
Sec. 65.   Effect of Resignations.
   
Sec. 66.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   
Sec. 67.   Offenses Relating to Petitions.
 
ARTICLE XI - FRANCHISES
   
Sec. 68.   Grants Limited.
   
Sec. 69.   Period of Grants.
   
Sec. 70.   Assignment.
   
Sec. 71.   Right of Purchase.
   
Sec. 72.   Extension by Annexation.
   
Sec. 73.   Right of Regulation.
   
Sec. 74.   Forfeitures.
   
Sec. 75.   Accounts and Reports.
   
Sec. 76.   Grants not Included.
   
Sec. 77.   General Provisions.
 
ARTICLE XII - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Sec. 78.   Ordinances Continued in Force.
   
Sec. 79.   Continuance of Present Officers.
   
Sec. 80.   Continuance of Contracts and Vested Rights.
   
Sec. 81.   Investigation.
   
Sec. 82.   Oath of Office.
   
Sec. 83.   Amendment of Charter.
   
Sec. 84.   Saving Clause.
   
Sec. 85.   When Charter Takes Effect.
   
Sec. 86.   General Disqualifications.
   
Sec. 87.   Political Activity.  (5-7-02)
   
Sec. 88.   Penalties.
   
Sec. 89.   Meetings.  (5-8-90)
   
Sec. 90.   Restriction of City Commission's Urban Renewal Powers.  (Repealed 5-
4-71)
   
Sec. 91.   Restriction of City Commission's Fair Housing Powers.  (11-7-67)
   
Sec. 92.   Police and Fire Divisions.  (11-3-70)
   
Sec. 93.   Fire Division; Fire Protection and Emergency Services Manpower. 
(11-6-90)
   
Sec. 94.   Fees and Assessments.  (5-5-87)
   
Sec. 95.   Police Division; Special Assessment for Additional Personnel. (5-8-
90)
   
Sec. 96.     Police Division; Special Assessment for Additional Personnel. (5-
2-95)
   
Sec. 97.   Police Division; Special Assessment for Additional Personnel. (5-8-
01)
 
CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, OHIO
   We, the people of the City of Springfield, Ohio, in order to obtain the
benefits of local self-government, to incorporate more direct and businesslike
methods in the transaction of our municipal affairs, and otherwise to promote
our common welfare, do adopt the following Charter of our City.
ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS
 
SECTION 1.  INCORPORATION.
   The inhabitants of the City of Springfield, Ohio, within the corporate
limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by
law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the
name of "The City of Springfield, Ohio."
 
SECTION 2.  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the
"city commission-manager government."  Pursuant to its provisions and subject
only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this Charter,
all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective city commission,
hereinafter referred to as "the city commission," which shall enact local
legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager,
law director and finance director.  The city manager shall execute the laws and
administer the government of the city.  The powers of this municipality shall
be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or to the extent not
prescribed herein, then in such manner as the commission may by ordinance
determine, and when not prescribed in this Charter or determined by the
Commission, such powers shall be exercised in such manner as may now or
hereafter be provided by the general laws of the State of Ohio.  No member of
the city commission shall directly interfere with the conduct of any
departments, except at the express direction of the commission.
 
SECTION 3.  POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The municipality shall have all the powers, general or special, governmental
or proprietary, that may now or hereafter lawfully be possessed or exercised by
municipal corporations under the constitution and laws of the State of Ohio.
 
 
ARTICLE II - THE CITY COMMISSION
SECTION 4.  NUMBER; SELECTION; TERM.
   The city commission shall have five (5) members, one of whom shall be the
Mayor, who shall be separately nominated and elected as Mayor, elected from the
city at-large in the manner provided in
Article IV of this Charter, for a term of four (4) years or until their
successors have been elected and take office as provided in
Section 14 herein.
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 5.  QUALIFICATIONS.
   Each member of the city commission, for at least one year prior to his (her)
election shall have been and during his (her) term of office shall continue to
be a resident of the city.  He (she) shall hold no other municipal employment
or elective public office.  If a member of the city commission shall cease to
possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude, his (her) office shall immediately become vacant.
(Amended 8-7-01, Ord. No. 01-203, Yeas 1,026; Nays 998.)
 
SECTION 6.  SALARY; BOND; PENALTY FOR ABSENCE.
   The annual salary of members of the city commission shall be $2,500.00 until
changed by ordinance, but no such ordinance shall affect the salary of a member
of the city commission during the term for which he was elected or appointed at
the time of adoption of such ordinance.
   Each member of the city commission shall give bond in the sum of $10,000.00
with a bonding company regularly accredited to do business in the State of Ohio
as surety thereon, to the approval of the finance director; and the premium of
each such bond shall be paid by the city.
   For each absence from a regular meeting of the commission, in excess of five
(5) in any calendar year, there shall be deducted a sum equal to two percent
(2%) of the annual salary of such member.  Absence from five (5) consecutive
regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member of the city
commission unless the absence is excused by the commission by resolution
setting forth such excuse and entered upon the journal.
 
SECTION 7.  PRESIDING OFFICER; MAYOR.
   The mayor shall be the president of the city commission, shall preside at
meetings of the city commission, shall have equal voting privileges as other
members of the city commission, shall exercise ceremonial functions on behalf
of the city, and shall be recognized as the head of the city government by the
governor for purposes of military law.  The mayor shall have no regular
administrative duties.  The mayor shall take command of the police, and govern
the city by proclamation during times of public danger or emergency, and the
mayor shall be the sole determiner of what constitutes public danger or
emergency.  The term of the mayor shall be four (4) years.
   The city commission shall appoint one of its members, not including the
mayor, to be assistant mayor.  The mayor shall have a vote on this
appointment.  The assistant mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or
disability of the mayor.  Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the term
of office of the assistant mayor shall be two (2) years.
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 8.  POWERS.
   All powers of local self-government of the city and the determination of all
matters of policy shall be vested in the city commission.
 
SECTION 9.  APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER.
   The city commission shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the
title of city manager and shall have the powers and perform the duties in this
Charter provided.  He shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience
in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his
office as herein set forth.  At the time of his appointment, he need not be a
resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside
within the city.
 
SECTION 10.  REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   The city commission shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term
and may remove him by a majority vote of its members.  If the city manager is
removed by such vote, the city commission shall cause to be paid him forthwith
any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary for the next thirty (30) days
following such removal.
 
SECTION 11.  VACANCIES IN THE OFFICES OF MAYOR OR COMMISSION.
   Vacancies in the city commission shall be filled within thirty (30) days by
vote of the majority of the remaining commission members.  Such person so
chosen shall serve until the next regular municipal election occurring not less
than one hundred (100) days after his selection.  At such election, a successor
shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term, if any; if not, for a full
term.
   If more than three (3) vacancies occur at one time, the remaining
commissioner, if there is one, and the members of the Civil Service Commission
shall, within thirty (30) days of the creation of such vacancy, by majority
vote, elect such number of persons as may be necessary to create a city
commission of two (2) members.  Thereafter, the remaining vacancies shall be
filled as set forth in this section.
   If such vacancies are not filled within the time specified, the vacancies
shall be filled by lot as follows:
   At the regular city commission meeting after the expiration of said thirty
(30) day period, each remaining commissioner shall place in nomination the name
of a person to fill the vacancy; thereupon the city law director shall draw
from the said lot a name, and such person shall be the commissioner to fill the
vacancy first created.
   After the commissioner so selected has been duly qualified and sworn into
office, the then commissioners shall fill the remaining vacancies, if any,
within fifteen (15) days by vote of the majority of such commissioners.
   If the remaining vacancies are not filled within said fifteen (15) day
period, they shall be filled by lot as follows:
   At the regular city commission meeting after the expiration of said fifteen
(15) day period, each remaining commissioner shall place in nomination the name
or names of persons equal to the number of existing vacancies; thereupon the
city law director shall draw from said lot the name of such nominees equal in
number to existing vacancies.  The name first drawn shall be the commissioner
for the vacancy first created; the second name for the remaining vacancy, if
any.
   All such selections shall be for the terms set forth in the first paragraph
of this
Section 11, and all such persons shall be qualified as set forth in
Section 5 hereof.
   In the event there is a vacancy in the office of mayor, the assistant mayor
shall thereafter become the mayor and shall serve in that capacity for the
unexpired term of the mayor.  The vacancy in the city commission thus created
would be filled as set forth previously in this section.
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas, 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 12.  CREATION OF NEW DEPARTMENTS; CHANGE OF DUTIES.
   The city commission by ordinance may create, change and abolish offices,
departments or agencies, other than the offices, departments and agencies
established by this Charter.  The city commission by ordinance may assign
additional functions or duties to offices, departments or agencies established
by this Charter, but may not discontinue or assign to any other office,
department or agency any function or duty assigned by this Charter to a
particular office, department or agency.
 
SECTION 13.  CITY CLERK.
   The city commission shall elect an officer of the city who shall have the
title of city clerk, shall give notice of its meetings, shall keep the journal
of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full, in
a book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform
such other duties as shall be required by this Charter or by ordinance.
 
SECTION 14.  MEETINGS OF THE CITY COMMISSION.
   At eight o'clock p.m. on the second day of January following a regular
municipal election, or if such day be Sunday or Monday, on the day following,
the city commission shall meet at the usual place for holding the meetings of
the legislative body of the city, at which time the newly-elected commissioners
shall assume the duties of their office.  Thereafter, the city commission shall
meet at such times as may be prescribed by its rules, but not less than forty-
eight (48) times in any calendar year with no meeting more than two weeks
following the immediately preceding meeting.
(Amended 11-8-77, Ord. No. 77-295, Yeas 7,343; Nays 5,951.)
 
SECTION 15.  SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The mayor, any two (2) members of the city commission, or the city manager,
may call special meetings of the city commission upon at least twelve (12)
hours written notice to each member, served personally or left at his usual
place of residence.
 
SECTION 16.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; JOURNAL.
   The City Commission shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
All meetings of the City Commission, except executive sessions, are open to the
public.  The City Commission shall keep a journal open to the public of all
meetings, except executive sessions, of the City Commission.
(Amended 5-8-90, Ord. No. 90-148, Yeas 7,468; Nays 2,969.)
 
SECTION 17.  ORDINANCES.
   In addition to such acts of the city commission as are required by statute
or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the city commission
establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds
or for the contracting of indebtedness shall be by ordinance.  The enacting
clause of all ordinances shall be:  "Be it ordained by the city commission of
The City of Springfield, Ohio."
 
SECTION 18.  ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.
   Each ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form, and shall not
contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly stated in the title; but
general appropriation ordinances may contain the various subjects and acts for
which moneys are to be appropriated.
   Before passage, each ordinance shall be read by title only at two meetings
of the commission not less than one week apart.  Provided, however, that upon
request by two commissioners such ordinance shall be read in its entirety.
Emergency ordinances need only be read once before passage and such reading
shall be by title only.  Provided, however, that such an emergency ordinance,
upon request by one commissioner, shall be read in its entirety once before
passage.  (Amended 11-8-77.)
 
SECTION 19.  EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   All ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Commission shall be in
effect fourteen (14) days from and after the date of their passage, except the
City Commission may, by an affirmative vote of four (4) of its members, pass
emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein.
   An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety or providing for
the usual daily operation of a municipal department, in which the emergency is
set forth and defined in the preamble thereto.
   Ordinances appropriating money may be passed as emergency measures, but no
measure making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special
privilege, or regulating the rate to be charged for its service by any public
utility, except modification or establishment of bus or transit routes shall
ever be so passed. 
(Amended 11-8-77.)
 
SECTION 20.  RECORD AND PUBLICATION.
   After final passage, every ordinance and resolution shall be recorded in a
book kept for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signatures of the
presiding officer and the city clerk.
 
   At least three correct copies of every ordinance of a general or permanent
nature, in the form in which it has been passed shall be made available to
public inspection in the office of the city clerk and a notice describing such
ordinance in brief and general terms and stating that such ordinance is
available for personal inspection at the office of the city clerk shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within ten
(10) days after the final passage of such ordinance.
(Amended 11-8-77.)
 
 
ARTICLE III - THE CITY MANAGER
 
SECTION 21.  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The city commission shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the
administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and
supervision of the city commission, and who shall hold office at the pleasure
of the city commission, and he shall have power and shall be required to:
   (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all
officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter
and except as he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint
and remove subordinates in such department or office;
   (2)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the commission and be
responsible for its administration after adoption;
   (3)   Prepare and submit to the commission as of the end of the fiscal year
a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for
the preceding year;
   (4)   Keep the commission advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable;
   (5)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or
required of him by the commission, not inconsistent with this Charter.
 
SECTION 22.  ABSENCE OF CITY MANAGER.
   During the temporary absence or disability, the City Manager's duties shall
be assumed by an employee of the city designated by the City Manager in the
City Manager's journal until such time as the City Commission by resolution
otherwise provides. 
(Amended 11-8-77.)
 
SECTION 23.  ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.
   There shall be a Department of Finance, Department of Law, and such other
departments as may be established by ordinance.  The work of each department
may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by
ordinance upon the recommendation of the city manager.  Pending the passage of
an ordinance or ordinances distributing the work of departments under the
supervision and control of the city manager among specific divisions, thereof,
the city manager may establish temporary divisions.
 
 
ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS
 
SECTION 24.  TIME OF HOLDING ELECTIONS.
   Regular municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in the odd numbered years.  Primary elections shall be
held at the time provided by the general election laws of the state.  Any
matter which, by the terms of the Charter, may be submitted to the electors of
the city at any special election may be submitted at a primary election or at a
regular municipal election.
 
SECTION 25.  BALLOTS.
   All elections and the voting devices used therefor as provided for in this
Charter shall be without party marks or designations.  The names of the
candidates to be voted upon shall be rotated as to position on the voting
devices in accordance with the general laws of the State of Ohio.
 
SECTION 26.  PETITIONS FOR PLACES ON PRIMARY BALLOT.
   Candidates for the office of city commissioner and the office of mayor shall
be nominated only by a non-partisan primary election.  The name of any elector
of the city shall be printed upon the primary ballot for the office of city
commissioner or the office of mayor if there is filed with the election
authorities a petition in accordance with the following provisions, to-wit:
   (a)   Such petition shall state the name and place of residence of each
person whose name is presented for a place upon the ballot and that such person
is a candidate for the office of city commissioner for, or the office of mayor
of, The City of Springfield, Ohio.  No person may be a candidate for the office
of city commissioner and the office of mayor in the same election.
   (b)   Such petitions shall be signed by two hundred fifty (250) electors of
the municipality.
   (c)   Such petitions shall contain a provision that each signer thereto
thereby pledges himself to support and vote for the candidate or candidates
whose names are therein presented for a place upon the ballot, and each elector
signing a petition shall add to his signature his place of residence, with
street and number, and date of signing, and may subscribe to one nomination for
each of the places to be filled and no more.  All signatures shall be made with
ink or indelible pencil.
   (d)   The signatures of all the petitioners need not be appended to one
paper, but to each separate paper there shall be attached an affidavit of the
circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereto, that each person
signed in his presence on the date mentioned, and that the signature is that of
the person whose name it purports to be.
   (e)   Such petitions shall not be signed by any elector more than one
hundred ten (110) days prior to the day of such primary election and such
petition shall be filed with the election authorities not less than ninety (90)
days previous to the day of such election.
   (f)   The number of signatures which may be filed by any one candidate shall
not exceed five hundred (500) in number. 
      (Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 27.  ACCEPTANCE.
   Any person whose name has been submitted for candidacy by any such petition
shall file his acceptance of such candidacy with the election authorities not
later than fifty-five (55) days previous to such election; otherwise, his name
shall not appear upon the ballot.
 
SECTION 28.  ELECTION.
   The candidates for nomination to the office of city commissioner who shall
receive the greatest vote in such primary election shall be placed on the
ballot at the next regular municipal election in number not to exceed twice the
number of vacancies in the city commission to be filled.  The candidates at the
regular municipal election, equal in number to the places to be filled, who
shall receive the highest number of votes at such regular municipal election,
shall be declared elected.  A tie between two or more candidates for the office
of city commissioner shall be decided by lot under the direction of the
election authorities, as provided by the general election laws of the state.
   The candidates for nomination to the office of mayor who shall receive the
two greatest number of votes shall be placed on the ballot at the next regular
municipal election.  The candidate who receives the greater number of votes at
such regular municipal election shall be declared elected. 
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 29.  PRIMARY.
   Should there be filed with the proper election authorities petitions in
accordance with
Section 26, and acceptance filed by the persons whose names are submitted for
candidacy by any such petitions in accordance with
Section 27, in number not to exceed twice the number of vacancies in the
commission to be filled in the case of the office of city commissioner or, in
the case of the office mayor, only one or two of such petitions, thereupon the
non-partisan primary election, provided for in
Section 26, shall automatically be dispensed with and such candidates for
nomination shall become the nominees and shall be placed on the ballot for the
corresponding office at the next regular municipal election.
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
ARTICLE V - TAXATION
 
SECTION 30.  TAXATION OF INCOME.
   The city may tax earned income at a rate of two and one-half (2.5) percent;
during such time as earned income shall be taxed by the City at an aggregate
rate of not less than two and one-half (2.5) percent, not less than twenty (20)
percent of any and all revenues derived from a tax on income shall be used only
to provide funds for the purpose of financing capital improvements, including
debt service charges on notes and bonds issued for capital improvements, of The
City of Springfield, Ohio.
   Earned income shall mean:  (1) Net profits from a business or profession,
exclusive of income from intangible personal property, and (2) Payment for work
done or services performed, including wages, salaries, commissions and other
compensations.
   Capital improvements shall mean any property or asset with an estimated
useful life of five (5) years or more, including land and interests therein,
and reconstructions, enlargements, and extensions thereof having an estimated
life of five (5) years or more. 
(Amended 11-8-83, Ord. No. 83-395.)
 
SECTION 31.  TAX LIMIT.
   The total tax rate which may be levied without a vote of the people for the
current operating expenses of The City of Springfield upon the tax list and
duplicate of property assessed and listed for taxation according to value for
the tax year 1966 and each year thereafter shall not exceed 3.27 mills per
dollar of assessed valuation, provided that said 3.27 mills shall be reduced in
each year by that number of mills, including fractional parts thereof, which
are levied in the respective year by the city within the ten mill limitation
imposed by Article XII, Section 2, of the Ohio Constitution, for the purpose of
paying interest on and principal of obligations issued without a vote of the
people.
 
   The limitation of this section of the Charter shall not operate as a
limitation upon the power of the commission to levy taxes upon such other
subjects and for such other purposes as may be lawful under the Constitution
and laws of the State of Ohio, nor shall this section be deemed to be a
limitation upon the power of the commission to incur indebtedness for all
lawful purposes within applicable constitutional and statutory limitations.
 
 
ARTICLE VI - FINANCE
 
SECTION 32.  THE ESTIMATE.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of January.  On or
before the first day of November of each year, the city manager shall submit to
the city commission an estimate of the expenditures and revenues of the city
departments for the ensuing year.  This estimate shall be compiled from
detailed information obtained from the several departments on uniform blanks to
be furnished by the city manager.  The classification of the estimate of
expenditures shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main functional
divisions of all departments, and shall give in parallel columns the following
information:
   (a)   A detailed estimate of the expense of conducting each department as
submitted by the department.
   (b)   Expenditures for corresponding items for the last two (2) fiscal
years.
   (c)   Expenditures for corresponding items for the current fiscal year,
including adjustments due to transfers between appropriations plus an estimate
of expenditures necessary to complete the current fiscal year.
   (d)   Increase or decrease of requests compared with the corresponding
appropriations for the current year.
   (e)   Such other information as is required by the city commission or that
the city manager may deem advisable to submit.
   (f)   The recommendation of the city manager as to the amounts to be
appropriated with reasons therefor in such detail as the city commission may
direct.
   Sufficient copies of such estimate shall be prepared and submitted that
there may be copies on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by
the public.
 
SECTION 33.  APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.
   Upon receipt of such estimate the city commission shall prepare an
appropriation ordinance, but before acting upon such ordinance the city
commission shall fix a time and place for holding a public hearing upon the
tentative appropriation, and shall publish a public notice of such hearing ten
(10) days before the hearing date.  During the ensuing year the appropriation
ordinance may be revised, amended and additional appropriations made without
the necessity of a public notice or hearing.
 
SECTION 34.  TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   Upon request of the city manager, the city commission may transfer any part
of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to a purpose or object for which
the appropriation for the current year has proved insufficient, or may
authorize a transfer to be made between items appropriated to the same office
or department.
 
SECTION 35.  UNENCUMBERED BALANCES.
   At the close of each fiscal year the unencumbered balance of each
appropriation shall revert to the respective fund from which it was
appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriations.  Any accruing
revenue of the city not appropriated as hereinbefore provided and any balances
at any time remaining after the purposes of the appropriation shall have been
satisfied or abandoned, may from time to time be appropriated by the city
commission to such uses as will not conflict with any uses for which
specifically such revenues accrued.  No money shall be drawn from the treasury
of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred,
except pursuant to the appropriations made by the city commission, but nothing
in this or the preceding section shall be construed to authorize the
application of revenue derived from a public utility of the city to any other
purpose than that of the utility from which the same was derived.
 
SECTION 36.  PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
   No warrant for the payment of any claim shall be issued by the finance
director until such claim shall have been approved by the finance director, the
head of the department for which the indebtedness was incurred, the purchasing
officer and the city manager, and such officers and their sureties shall be
liable to the municipality for all loss or damage sustained by the municipality
by reason of the unlawful approval of any such claim.  Whenever any claim shall
be presented to the finance director, he shall have power to require evidence
that the amount claimed is justly due and is in conformity to law and
ordinance, and for that purpose he may summon before him any officer, agent or
employee, or any department of the municipality, or any other person, and
examine him upon oath or affirmation relative thereto.  The chief executive
officer, whatever his title, and the purchasing agent, if any, for any
administrative board or commission shall comply with this section.
 
SECTION 37.  CERTIFICATION OF FUNDS.
   No contract or agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of
money in excess of $100.00 shall be entered into unless the finance director
shall first certify to the city commission or to the proper officer, as the
case may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation
or expenditure is in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which it is to
be drawn, and not appropriated for any other purpose, and a copy of such
certificate shall be filed and immediately recorded by the finance director. 
The sum so certified shall not thereafter be considered unencumbered until the
city is discharged from such contract, agreement or obligation.  The provisions
of this section shall not apply to contracts or proceedings relating to
improvements any part of the cost of which is to be paid by special
assessments. 
(Amended 11-8-77, Ord. No. 77-295, Yeas 7,343; Nays 5,951.)
 
SECTION 38.  MONEY IN THE FUND.
   All monies actually in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which
they are to be drawn, and all monies applicable to the payment of the
obligation or appropriation involved that are anticipated to come into the
treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement or obligation from
taxes, assessments, or license fees, or from sales of services, products or by-
products of any city undertaking, and moneys to be derived from lawfully
authorized bonds sold and in the process of delivery, and all moneys to be
derived from grants or loans made by the United States government or the state
of Ohio or any department, division, agency, authority or unit thereof to the
city, for the purpose of such certificate shall be deemed in the treasury to
the credit of the appropriate fund and shall be subject to such certification. 
(Amended 11-8-77, Ord. No. 77-295, Yeas 7,343; Nays 5,951.)
 
SECTION 39.  FINANCIAL REPORT.
   The city commission may provide by ordinance for monthly or annual financial
reports by the city manager or finance director on forms prescribed by the city
commission.  At the end of each year the city commission shall print an annual
report, giving a detailed statement of all receipts, expenditures and
liabilities of the city; a detailed comparison of such receipts, expenditures
and liabilities with those of the year preceding; and a summary of city
commission and administrative operations for the previous twelve (12) months. 
A copy of this report shall be furnished to any citizens of the city who may
apply therefor at the office of the clerk of the city commission.
 
SECTION 40.  ASSESSMENTS.
   In levying special assessments to pay any part of the cost of any public
work or improvement, the city commission shall not exceed any limitation as to
the amount thereof which may be prescribed by the general laws of the state
applicable to municipalities and in force at the time it is determined by the
city commission that any such work shall be done or improvement made.  The city
commission may, however, by ordinance, provide different procedures for levying
special assessments other than those established by the general laws of the
state.
 
SECTION 41.  IMPROVEMENTS BY DIRECT LABOR.
   Nothing in the preceding section shall be construed to prohibit the city
commission from doing any public work or making any public improvement by the
direct employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary
supplies and materials, with separate accounting as to each improvement so
made.
 
SECTION 42.  EXPENDITURES REQUIRING CITY COMMISSION AUTHORIZATION.
   When an expenditure, other than the compensation of persons employed by the
city, exceeds the threshold dollar amount requiring legislative authorization
established in Section 735.05 of the Ohio Revised Code, as presently enacted
and as it may be amended from time to time by the General Assembly, such
expenditures shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance of the city
commission, and no contract involving an expenditure in excess of such sum
shall be made or awarded except upon the approval of the city commission.
(Amended 11-6-90, Ord. No. 90-429, Yeas 8,768; Nays 8,532.)
 
SECTION 43.  TIME OF MAKING CONTRACTS.
   The city commission shall not enter into any contract which is not to go
into effect during the term for which all the members of such city commission
are elected.
 
SECTION 44.  MODIFICATION OF CONTRACTS.
   When it becomes necessary, in the opinion of the city manager in the
prosecution of any work or improvement under contract, to make alterations or
modifications in such contract, such alterations or modifications, if made,
shall be of no effect until the price to be paid for the work or material, or
both, under the altered or modified contract, has been agreed upon in writing
and signed by the contractor and by the city manager and approved by the city
commission.
 
SECTION 45.  MANDATORY BIDDING.
   In no instance shall contracts be let for any project, improvement or
purchase if bids are taken which exceed the estimate for the project,
improvement or purchase contemplated by more than ten percent of the estimate. 
If bids for parts of the project, improvement or purchase are taken separately,
contracts for those parts which do not exceed the estimate by more than ten
percent may be let.  The city's finance department shall advertise for and
solicit formal bids for projects, improvements and purchases when required to
do so by Sections 735.05, 735.051, 735.052 and 735.053 of the Ohio Revised
Code, as presently enacted and as they may be amended from time to time by the
General Assembly.
(Amended 11-6-90, Ord. No. 90-429, Yeas 8,768; Nays 8,532.)
 
SECTION 46.  CONTRACTS; WHEN VOID.
   All contracts, agreements or other obligations entered into, and all
ordinances passed, or resolutions and orders adopted, contrary to the
provisions of the preceding sections shall be void.
 
 
ARTICLE VII - CIVIL SERVICE
 
SECTION 47.  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The city commission shall appoint five (5) electors of the city as civil
service commissioners.  Members of the civil service commission shall not hold
any other public office except that of notary public.  Members shall be
appointed to serve for a term of three (3) years and until their successors
have been appointed and qualified.  Any vacancy shall be filled by the city
commission for the unexpired term.  The city commission may remove any member
upon stating in writing the reasons for removal and allowing him an opportunity
to be heard in his own defense.  The members of the existing civil service
commission shall continue in office for their appointed terms.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the civil service commission, and all
matters pertaining to civil service of The City of Springfield, Ohio, shall be
governed by the general laws of the state presently in effect, or hereafter
enacted, which are applicable thereto.  The positions of chief of police and
fire chief in the city shall be in the unclassified service as that term is
defined and with the same effect as is given such term in Section 124.11 of the
Ohio Revised Code as presently enacted.  The chief of police and fire chief
shall be appointed and may be removed by the City Manager, subject to the
concurrence by a majority vote of the city commission.
   In the case of promotion of any person to a rank above the rank of patrolman
in the police division of the city or to a rank above the rank of firefighter
in the fire division of the city, other than a promotion or appointment to the
position of chief of police or fire chief in the city, such promotion shall be
made only after a person has passed a competitive promotional examination. 
Such examination shall include an evaluation of such factors as education,
training, capacity, and knowledge.  Examinations shall consist of one or more
tests in any combination.  Tests shall be written and oral and shall be
designed to fairly test the relative capacity of the persons examined to
discharge the particular duties of the position for which appointment is
sought.  Credit for efficiency and seniority in service shall be added to the
examination grade.
   The number, type and weight to be given such tests in the examination
process and the relative weight to be given to efficiency and seniority in
service shall be set forth by an ordinance duly adopted by the city commission.
(Amended 11-8-83, Ord. No. 83-395.)
   In the case of appointment of any person to the classified position of
police officer in the Police Division of the City, the City Manager may appoint
persons who have obtained and maintained Basic Ohio Peace Officer Certification
and who are employed by another jurisdiction as a police officer, deputy
sheriff, or state highway patrol officer to such position without first
administering a competitive examination.  In lieu of a competitive examination,
the City Manager may assess the merit and fitness of any such applicant so
qualified by review of his or her record while employed in a law enforcement
officer.  The selection procedures and selection criteria applicable to such
persons appointed without taking a competitive examination shall be as set
forth by an ordinance duly adopted by the City Commission.
(Enacted 11-4-97, Ord. No. 97-307, Yeas 6,030; Nays 5,630.)
 
 
ARTICLE VIII - INITIATIVE
 
SECTION 48.  PROPOSAL PETITION.
   Any proposed ordinance including an ordinance for the repeal or amendment of
an ordinance then in effect may be submitted to the city commission by petition
signed by at least five percent (5%) of the total number of registered voters
in the municipality at the last regular municipal election.  All petitions
circulated with respect to any proposed ordinance shall be uniform in
character, shall contain the proposed ordinance in full, and shall have printed
or written thereon the names and addresses of at least five (5) electors who
shall be officially regarded as filing the petition and shall constitute a
committee of the petitioners for the purpose hereinafter named.
   Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, address and date.  The
signatures to any such petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to
each such paper there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof,
stating the number of signers to such part of the petition and that each
signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose
name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant and
on the date indicated.
   Before any ordinance so proposed shall be submitted to the City Commission,
it shall first be approved as to its form by the city law director, whose duty
it shall be to draft such proposed ordinance in proper legal language, and to
render such other service to persons desiring to propose such ordinance as
shall be necessary to make the same proper for consideration by the City
Commission.
 
SECTION 49.  TIME OF FILING.
   All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the clerk
of the city commission as one instrument, within one hundred twenty days from
the date of the first signature thereon, and when so filed the clerk shall
submit the same to the city commission at its next regular meeting and
provision shall be made for public hearings upon the proposed ordinance within
ten (10) days from the time said petition was presented to the city commission.
 
SECTION 50.  PETITION FOR ELECTION.
   The city commission shall at once proceed to consider such petition and
shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from the date of
submission.  If the city commission rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes
it in a different form from that set forth in the petition, or fails to act
finally upon it within the time stated, the committee of the petitioners by
written demand filed with clerk of the city commission not later than twenty
(20) days after final action or inaction by the city commission, may require
that the proposed ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors in its
original form, if, with or prior to such demand, a petition for such election,
signed after the final action for inaction of the city commission is filed with
such clerk bearing additional signatures of five percent (5%) of the registered
voters of the city at the last election, none of whom were signers of the first
petition.  Such clerk shall forthwith cause notice of the filing of such demand
and petition to be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the
City, and shall also within five (5) days certify to the officers having
control of elections the proposed ordinances, stating whether or not a special
election is demanded in the petitions, the percentage of registered voters at
the last municipal election who signed the two petitions in the aggregate, and
the date on which he published the notice last mentioned.
 
SECTION 51.  TIME OF HOLDING ELECTION.
   If an election is to be held not more than ninety (90) days nor less than
thirty (30) days after the publication of such notice by the clerk, such
proposed ordinance shall be submitted to a vote of the electors at such
election.  If no election is to be held within the time aforesaid, the election
officers shall provide for submitting the proposed ordinance to the electors at
a special election to be held no later than sixty (60) days nor earlier than
thirty (30) days after the publication of such notice, if the petition for such
ordinance and the petition for such election so demand, and if the signers of
the two petitions amount in the aggregate to at least twenty-five percent (25%)
of the registered voters in the municipality at the last regular municipal
election.  At least ten (10) days before any such election the clerk of the
city commission shall cause such proposed ordinance to be published.
 
SECTION 52.  ACCEPTED VOTING DEVICE.
   The voting devices approved by the general laws of the State of Ohio used
when voting upon any such proposed ordinance shall clearly state the title of
the ordinance to be voted on, and shall provide for a vote "For" and "Against"
the ordinance.  If a majority of the electors voting on any such proposed
ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance
of the city.
 
SECTION 53.  AMENDMENTS AND REPEALS.
   No ordinance adopted by an electoral vote can be replaced or amended except
by an electoral vote.  But an ordinance to repeal or amend any such ordinance
may, by resolution of the city commission, be submitted to an electoral vote at
any regular election or at any special municipal election called for some other
purpose, provided notice of the intention so to do be published by the city
commission not more than sixty (60) nor less than thirty (30) days prior to
such election, in the manner required for the publication of ordinances.  If an
amendment is so proposed, such notice shall contain the proposed amendment in
full.  Such submission shall be in the same manner, and the vote shall have the
same effect, as in cases of ordinances submitted to an election by popular
petition.  Such ordinance to be voted upon shall be published in the manner
provided by
Section 20 hereof.
 
ARTICLE IX - REFERENDUM
 
SECTION 54.  PETITION FOR REFERENDUM.
   No ordinance passed by the city commission, unless it be an emergency
measure or the annual appropriation ordinance, shall go into effect until
fourteen (14) days after its final passage.  If, at any time within said
fourteen (14) days, a petition signed by ten percent (10%) of the total number
of registered voters in the municipality at the last regular municipal election
be filed with the clerk of the city commission, requesting that any such
ordinance be repealed or amended as stated in the petition, it shall not become
operative until the steps indicated herein have been taken.  Such petition
shall have stated therein the names and addresses of at least five (5) electors
as a committee to represent the petitioners.
   Referendum petitions need not contain the text of the ordinance or
ordinances the repeal of which is sought, but shall contain the proposed
amendment, if an amendment is demanded, and shall be subject in all other
respects to the requirements for petitions submitting proposed ordinances to
the City Commission.  Voting devices used in referendum elections shall conform
in all respects to those provided for in
Section 52 of this Charter.
(Amended 11-8-77, Ord. No. 77-295, Yeas 7,343; Nays 5,951.)
 
SECTION 55.  PROCEEDINGS THEREUNDER.
   The clerk of the city commission shall, at its next meeting, present the
petition to the city commission, which shall proceed to reconsider the
ordinance.  If, within thirty (30) days after the filing of such petition, the
ordinance be not repealed or amended as requested, the city commission shall
provide for submitting the proposed repeal or amendment to a vote of the
electors provided a majority of the committee named in the petition to
represent the petitioners shall, by writing filed with the clerk of the city
commission within twenty (20) days after the expiration of the said thirty (30)
days, so require.  In so doing the city commission shall be governed by the
provisions of
Section 50 hereof respecting the time of submission and the manner of voting on
ordinances proposed to the city commission by petition; excepting that the
question of calling a special election for such purpose shall be determined by
the demand and number of signers of the petition requesting the repeal or
amendment of such ordinance, which number shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of
the registered voters in the municipality at the last regular municipal
election; and excepting further that the city commission may call, and fix the
time for, a special election for such purpose, if in its judgment the public
interest will be prejudiced by delay.
   If, when submitted to a vote of the electors, such repeal or amendment be
approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall thereupon go into
effect as an ordinance of the city; but, if any such amendment is clearly
separable from the remainder of the ordinance and does not materially affect
the other provisions of such ordinance, all sections of the ordinance except
that sought to be amended and those dependent thereon shall take effect as
though no referendum of any portion of the ordinance had been demanded.
 
SECTION 56.  REFERENDUM ON INITIATED ORDINANCES; CONFLICT.
   Ordinances submitted to the city commission by initiative petition and
passed by the city commission without change, or passed in an amended form and
not required to be submitted to a vote of the electors by the committee of the
petitioners, shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other
ordinances.  If the provisions of two or more ordinances adopted or approved at
the same election conflict, the ordinance receiving the highest affirmative
vote shall prevail.
 
SECTION 57.  EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   Ordinances passed as emergency measures shall be subject to referendum in
like manner as other ordinances, except that they shall go into effect at the
time indicated in such ordinances.  If, when submitted to a vote of the
electors, an emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those voting
thereon, it shall be considered repealed as regards any further action
thereunder; but such measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority
for payment in accordance with the ordinance of any expense incurred previous
to the referendum vote thereon.
 
SECTION 58.  PRELIMINARY ACTION.
   In case a petition be filed requiring that a measure passed by the city
commission providing for an expenditure of money, a bond issue, or a public
improvement be submitted to a vote of the electors, all steps preliminary to
such actual issuance of bonds, or actual execution of a contract for such
improvement, may be taken prior to the election.
 
 
ARTICLE X - RECALL
 
SECTION 59.  RECALL PETITION.
   Any or all members of the city commission may be removed from office by the
electors by the following procedure:
   A petition for the recall of the commissioner or commissioners designated,
signed by at least five hundred (500) of the electors of the city, and
containing a statement in not more than two hundred (200) words of the grounds
of the recall, shall be filed with the clerk of the city commission, who shall
forthwith notify the commissioner or commissioners sought to be removed, and he
or they, within five (5) days after such notice, may file with such clerk of
the city commission a defensive statement in not exceeding two hundred (200)
words.  The clerk of the city commission shall at once, upon expiration of said
five (5) days, cause sufficient printed or typewritten copies of such petition,
without the signatures, to be made, and to each of them he shall attach a
printed or typewritten copy of such defensive statement, if one is furnished
him within the time provided.  The clerk of the city commission shall cause one
copy of such petition to be placed on file in the said clerk's office, and
provide facilities for the public signing the same, and shall also cause one
copy to be placed in each of the several fire engine houses of the City, where
the same shall be in the custody of the officer in charge of the house, who
shall provide facilities for the public signing the same.  The clerk of the
city commission shall immediately cause notice to be published in some
newspaper of general circulation in the city of the placing of such copies of
such petition.
   Such copies of such petition shall remain on file in the several places
designated for the period of thirty (30) days, during which time any of them
may be signed by any registered voter in the municipality, but not by agent or
attorney.
 
SECTION 60.  NOTICE.
   At the expiration of said period of thirty (30) days, the clerk of the city
commission shall assemble all of said copies in his office as one instrument
and shall examine the same and ascertain and certify thereon whether the
signatures thereto amount to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the registered
voters in the municipality at the last regular municipal election of the city. 
If such signatures do amount to such percent, he shall at once serve notice of
that fact upon the commissioner or commissioners designated in the petition,
and also deliver to the election authorities a copy of the original petition
with his certificate as to the percentage of registered voters who signed the
same, and a certificate as to the date of his last mentioned notice to the
commissioner or commissioners designated in the petition.
 
SECTION 61.  RECALL ELECTION.
   If the commissioner or commissioners, or any of them, designated in the
petition file with the clerk of the city commission within five (5) days after
the last mentioned notice from the said clerk of the city commission his or
their written resignation, the clerk of the city commission shall at once
notify the election authorities of that fact; and such resignation shall be
irrevocable, and the city commission shall proceed to fill the vacancy.  In the
absence of any such resignation, the election authorities shall forthwith order
and fix a day for holding a recall election for the removal of those not
resigning.  Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more
than sixty (60) days after the expiration of the period of five (5) days last
mentioned, and at the same time as any other general or special election held
within such period; but if no such election be held within such period, the
election authorities shall call a special recall election to be held within the
period aforesaid.
 
SECTION 62.  VOTING DEVICES.
   The voting devices used at such recall election shall conform to the
following requirements.  With respect to each person whose removal is sought,
the question shall be submitted:  "Shall (name of person) be removed from the
office of city commission by recall?"  Adjacent to each such question, there
shall be clearly indicated a place for those voting in favor of the recall of
the person in question and there shall also be clearly indicated a place for
those voting against the recall of the person in question.
 
SECTION 63.  FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   In any such election, if a majority of the votes cast on the question of
removal of any commissioner are affirmative, the person whose removal is sought
shall thereupon be deemed removed from office upon the announcement of the
official canvass of that election, and the vacancy caused by such recall shall
be filled by the remainder of the city commission according to the provisions
of
Section 11 of this Charter.
   If, however, an election is held for the recall of more than two (2)
commissioners, candidates to succeed them for their unexpired terms shall be
voted upon at the same election, and shall be nominated without primary
election, by petitions signed, dated and verified in the manner required for
petitions presenting names of candidates for nomination at a primary election,
and similar in form to such petitions, but signed by electors equal in number
to at least five percent (5%) of the registered voters in the municipality at
the last regular municipal election of the city, and filed with the election
authorities at least thirty (30) days prior to such recall election.  But no
such nominating petition shall be signed or circulated until after the time has
expired for signing the copies of the petition for the recall, and any
signatures thereon antedating such time shall not be counted.
 
SECTION 64.  COUNTING THE VOTE.
   Candidates shall not be nominated to succeed any particular commissioner;
but if only one commissioner is removed at such election, the candidate at such
election receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected to
fill the vacancy; and if more than one commissioner is removed at such
election, such candidates equal in number to the number of commissioners
removed shall be declared elected to fill the vacancies; and among the
successful candidates, those receiving the greater number of votes shall be
declared elected for the longer terms.  Cases of ties, and all other matters
not herein specially provided for, shall be determined by the rules governing
elections generally.
 
SECTION 65.  EFFECT OF RESIGNATIONS.
   No proceedings for the recall of all of the members of the city commission
at the same election shall be defeated in whole or in part by the resignation
of any or all of them, but upon the resignation of any of them the city
commission shall have power to fill the vacancy until a successor is elected,
and the proceedings for the recall and the election of successors shall
continue and have the same effect as though there had been no resignation.
 
SECTION 66.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   Except as herein otherwise provided, no petition to recall any commissioner
shall be filed within six (6) months after he takes office.  No person removed
by recall shall be eligible to be elected or appointed to the city commission
for a period of two (2) years after the date of such recall.  The clerk of the
city commission shall preserve in his office all papers comprising or connected
with a petition for a recall for a period of one (1) year after the same were
filed.  The method of removal herein provided is in addition to such other
methods as are or may be provided by general law.
 
SECTION 67.  OFFENSES RELATING TO PETITIONS.
   No person shall falsely impersonate another, or purposely write his name or
residence falsely, in the signing of any petition for initiative, referendum,
or recall, or forge any name thereto, or sign any such paper with knowledge
that he is not a qualified elector of the municipality.  No person shall sign,
or knowingly permit to be signed, any petition for recall at any place other
than one of the places hereinbefore designated for the signing of such
petitions.  Nor shall any person employ or pay another, or accept employment or
payment, for circulating any initiative or referendum petition upon the basis
of the number of signatures procured thereto.  Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be fined in a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars and the
costs of prosecution.  The foregoing provisions shall not be held to be
exclusive of, but in addition to, all laws of the State prescribing penalties
for the same offenses or for other offenses relating to the same matter.
 
 
ARTICLE XI - FRANCHISES
 
SECTION 68.  GRANTS LIMITED.
   No grant, or renewal thereof, to construct and operate a public utility in
the streets and public grounds of the city shall be made by the city commission
to any individual, company or corporation in violation of any of the
limitations contained in this Charter.
 
SECTION 69.  PERIOD OF GRANTS.
   No such grant shall be exclusive, nor shall it be made for a longer period
than twenty (20) years.  No such grant shall be renewed earlier than two (2)
years prior to its expiration unless the city commission shall by vote of at
least four (4) of its members first declare by ordinance its intention of
considering a renewal thereof.  All grants of the right to make extensions of
any public utility shall be subject as far as practicable to the terms of the
original grant and shall expire therewith.
 
SECTION 70.  ASSIGNMENT.
   No such grant shall be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated except with
the express consent of the city commission.
 
SECTION 71.  RIGHT OF PURCHASE.
   All such grants shall reserve to the city the right to purchase or lease all
the property of the utility used in or useful for the operation of the utility,
at a price either fixed in the ordinance making the grant, or to be fixed in
the manner provided by such ordinance, which price shall in no event include
any value for the grant.  Nothing, in such ordinance, shall prevent the city
from acquiring such property by condemnation proceedings or in any other lawful
mode, which rights shall be in addition to those reserved in such ordinance. 
Upon the acquisition of such property by purchase, condemnation or otherwise,
all grants shall at once terminate.
 
SECTION 72.  EXTENSION BY ANNEXATION.
   It shall be provided in every such grant that upon the annexation of any
territory to the city the portion of any such utility that may be located
within such annexed territory and upon the streets, alleys or public grounds
thereof, shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of the grant as though it
were an extension made thereunder.
 
SECTION 73.  RIGHT OF REGULATION.
   All grants shall be subject to the right of the city, whether in terms
reserved or not, to control at all times the distribution of space in, over,
under or across all streets, alleys or public grounds occupied by public
utility fixtures, and, when in the opinion of the city commission the public
interest so requires, such fixtures may be caused to be reconstructed,
relocated, altered or discontinued; and said city shall at all times have the
power to pass all regulatory ordinances affecting such utilities which in the
opinion of the city commission are required in the interest of the public
health, safety or accommodation.
 
SECTION 74. FORFEITURES.
   If any action shall be instituted or prosecuted directly or indirectly by
the grantee of any such grant, or by its stockholders or creditors, to set
aside or have declared void any of the terms of any such grant, the whole of
such grant may be thereupon forfeited and annulled at the option of the city
commission to be expressed by ordinance.  All such grants shall make provision
for the declaration of a forfeiture by the city commission for the violation by
the grantee of any of the terms thereof.
 
SECTION 75.  ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS.
   Every person or corporation operating a public utility within the city
limits, whether under a grant heretofore or hereafter obtained, shall keep and
maintain at some place within the city suitable and complete books of account,
showing in detail the assets, financial obligation, gross revenue, net profits
and all the operations of such utility which are usually shown by a complete
system of bookkeeping.
   Each such person or corporation, within sixty (60) days after the end of
each of its fiscal years, unless the city commission shall extend the time,
shall file with the city commission a report for the preceding fiscal year
showing the gross revenue, the net profits, expenses or repairs, betterments
and additions, amount paid for salaries, amount paid for interest and discount,
other expenses or operation, and such other information, if any, as the city
commission from time to time may prescribe.  If the city commission shall
prescribe the form for such reports, then such reports shall be made in the
form from time to time prescribed by such commission.
   It shall be the duty of each such person or corporation to furnish the city
commission such supplementary or special information about its affairs as the
commission may demand; and the commission, or its authorized representative,
shall at any and all reasonable times have access to all books, records and
papers of each and every such person or corporation, with privilege of taking
copies of same or any part thereof.
   The duties herein prescribed may be specifically enforced by appropriate
legal proceedings; and in addition, each such person or corporation, for
failure to comply with the provisions of this section, shall be liable to The
city of Springfield, Ohio, in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars per day for
each day of such failure, to be recovered in a civil action in the name of the
city.
   The provisions of this section do not apply to any utility extending in its
operations to other communities not properly suburban to The city of
Springfield, Ohio; but the city commission by ordinance may make the same, or
any part thereof, applicable to the portion of any such utility operated within
the limits of the city.
 
SECTION 76.  GRANTS NOT INCLUDED.
   Revocable permits for laying spur tracks across or along streets, alleys or
public grounds, to connect a railroad with any property in need of switching
facilities, shall not be regarded as a grant within the meaning of this
Charter, but may be permitted in accordance with such terms and conditions as
the city commission may by ordinance prescribe.  Such revocable  permits shall
be in writing and filed with the clerk of the city commission.
 
SECTION 77.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Nothing in this Charter contained shall be operated in any way, except as
herein specifically stated, to limit the city commission in the exercise of any
of its lawful powers respecting public utilities, or to prohibit the city
commission from imposing in any such grant such further restrictions and
provisions as it may deem to be in the public interest, provided only that the
same are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or the
constitution of the state.
 
 
ARTICLE XII - GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
SECTION 78.  ORDINANCES CONTINUED IN FORCE.
   All ordinances and resolutions in force at the time of the taking effect of
this Charter, not inconsistent with its provisions, shall continue in full
force and effect until amended or repealed.
 
SECTION 79.  CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT OFFICERS.
   All persons holding office at the time this Charter is adopted, shall
continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall
have been otherwise made in accordance with this Charter for the performance or
discontinuance of the duties of any such office.  When such provision shall
have been made the term of any such officer shall expire and the office be
deemed abolished.  The powers which are conferred and the duties which are
imposed upon any officer, board or department of the city under the laws of the
state, or under any city ordinance or contract in force at the time of the
taking effect of this act shall, if such office or department is abolished by
this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the commission,
officer, board or department upon whom are imposed corresponding functions,
powers and duties by this Charter or by any ordinance or resolution of the city
thereafter enacted.
 
SECTION 80.  CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS AND VESTED RIGHTS.
   All vested rights of the city shall continue to be vested and shall not in
any manner be affected by the adoption of this Charter; nor shall any right or
liability, or pending suit or prosecution, either in behalf of or against the
city, be in any manner affected by the adoption of this Charter, unless
otherwise herein expressly provided to the contrary.  All contracts entered
into by the city or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter
shall continue in full force and effect.  All public work begun prior to the
taking effect of this Charter shall be continued and perfected hereunder. 
Public improvements for which legislative steps shall have been taken under
laws in force at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to
completion in accordance with the provisions of such laws.
 
SECTION 81.  INVESTIGATION.
   The city commission, or any committee thereof, the city manager and any
advisory board appointed by the commission for such purpose, shall have power
at any time to cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any
officer or employee to be investigated; and for such purpose shall have power
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and
other evidence; and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or attachments which
shall be signed by the president or chairman of the body or by the officer
making the investigation, and shall be served by any officer authorized by law
to serve such process.  The authority making such investigation shall also have
power to cause the testimony to be given under oath to be administered by some
officer authorized by general law to administer oaths; and shall also have
power to punish as for contempt any person refusing to testify to any fact
within his knowledge, or to produce any books or papers under his control,
relating to the matter under investigation.
 
SECTION 82.  OATH OF OFFICE.
   All officers before taking office shall take the oath of office prescribed
by law; but the oath of office of city commissioner shall be in writing and be
filed with the clerk of the city commission and shall contain the assertion
that in his candidacy for nomination and election he has not violated any
provisions of
Section 5 of this Charter.
 
SECTION 83.  AMENDMENT OF CHARTER.
   Amendments to this Charter may be submitted to the electors of the city by a
two-thirds vote of the city commission, and shall be submitted to such
electorate when a petition is filed by ten percent (10%) of the registered
voters in the municipality at the last regular municipal election of the city,
setting forth any such approved amendments as received by the city commission. 
The ordinance providing for the submission of any such amendment shall require
that it be submitted to the electors of the city at the next regular municipal
election if one shall occur not less than sixty (60) nor more than one hundred
twenty (120) days after its passage; otherwise, it shall provide for the
submission of the amendment at a special election to be called and held within
the time aforesaid.  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election the
clerk of the City Commission shall mail a copy of the proposed amendment to
each elector whose name appears upon the poll or registration books at the last
regular municipal or general election.  If such proposed amendment is approved
by a majority of the electors voting thereon, it shall become a part of the
Charter at the time fixed therein.
 
SECTION 84.  SAVING CLAUSE.
   If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the
validity, force, or effect of any other section or part of a section of this
Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section
is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part
of a section so held unconstitutional or invalid.
 
SECTION 85.  WHEN CHARTER TAKES EFFECT.
   For the purpose of nominating and electing officers and all purposes
connected therewith and for the purpose of exercising the powers of the city as
provided herein, this Charter shall take effect from the time of its approval
by the registered voters in the  municipality at the last election of the
city.  For the purpose of establishing departments, divisions, and officers and
distributing the functions thereof, and for all other purposes, it shall take
effect on the first day of January, 1966.
 
SECTION 86.  GENERAL DISQUALIFICATIONS.
   No member of the city commission, the city manager or any other officer or
employee of the city, shall directly or indirectly be interested in any
contract, job, work or service with or for the city; nor in the profits or
emoluments thereof, nor in the expenditure of any money on the part of the city
other than his fixed compensation; and any contract with the city in which any
such officer or employee is, or becomes, interested may be declared void by the
city commission.
   No member of the city commission, the city manager or other officer or
employee of the city shall knowingly accept any gift, frank, free ticket, pass,
reduced price or reduced rate of service from any person, firm or corporation
operating a public utility or engaged in business of a public nature within the
city, or from any person known to him to have or to be endeavoring to secure a
contract with the city.  But the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the transportation of policemen or firemen in uniform or wearing their official
badges, when the same is, or may be, provided by ordinance.
 
SECTION 87.  POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Neither the city manager nor any other person in the employ of the city,
except elected officials, shall take any active part in securing, or contribute
any money toward, the nomination or election of any candidate or candidates for
the office of city commissioner or mayor, except to answer such questions as
may be put to them and as they may desire to answer.
(Amended 5-7-02, Ord. No. 02-120, Yeas 3,105; Nays 1,265.)
 
SECTION 88.  PENALTIES.
   The provisions of the last two preceding sections shall not be considered
exclusive, but as an addition to any other provision of the general laws of the
state applicable to the case; and a violation of any provisions of either of
such sections shall subject the offender to removal from his office or
employment, and to punishment by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars.
 
SECTION 89.  MEETINGS.
   All meetings, except executive sessions, of the City Commission and other
boards, commissions, and committees of the City are open to the public.  The
City Commission and other boards, commissions, and committees of the City shall
comply with Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22 as presently in effect, or
hereafter enacted.
(Amended 5-8-90, Ord. No. 90-148, Yeas 7,468; Nays 2,969.)
 
SECTION 90.  RESTRICTION OF CITY COMMISSION'S URBAN RENEWAL POWERS.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  This section was repealed by the voters May 4, 1971.)
 
SECTION 91.  RESTRICTION OF CITY COMMISSION'S FAIR HOUSING POWERS.
   The city commission of The City of Springfield shall not enact any ordinance
regulating the sale, renting, leasing, subleasing, listing, advertisement,
transfer, assignment or financing of real property (other than the furnishing
of facilities and lodging in establishments of public accommodation) referable
to consideration of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry unless
such measure first shall have been submitted to and approved by the electors of
The City of Springfield, Ohio.  The procedure for the submission of such plan
to the electorate shall be the same as those provided in
Sections 50,
51 and
52 of the Charter of The City of Springfield for the submission to the
electorate of an initiated ordinance.  Any such ordinance in effect at the time
of adoption of this section automatically shall cease to be effective until
approved by the electors as provided above.
(Enacted 11-7-67.)
 
SECTION 92.  POLICE AND FIRE DIVISIONS.
   The city commission shall have the sole duty and right to classify,
reorganize and abolish positions, by ordinance, in the Police and Fire
Divisions and such duty and right shall not be delegated to any City official
or department.  On the date of enactment of this section, all positions and
ranks in the Police and Fire Divisions shall be as classified on January 1,
1970, and any change therein shall be made only as set forth in this section. 
In providing for the classification of the personnel of the Police and Fire
Divisions, the City Commission shall not abolish any position until a vacancy
shall have occurred therein. 
(Enacted 11-3-70, Ord .No. 70-117, Yeas 9,709; Nays 8,526.)
 
SECTION 93.  FIRE DIVISION; FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY SERVICES MANPOWER.
   There is established within the government of The City of Springfield a Fire
Division.  The Fire Division shall protect the lives and property of the people
in case of fire and shall perform emergency medical and/or rescue services in
The City of Springfield, and shall be the sole and exclusive, publicly-funded
enterprise providing these services.
   The said Fire Division shall consist of:
   1.   No fewer than 127 firemedics and/or firemedics/paramedics, including a
Fire Chief of the Fire Division;
   2.   In addition to the above described 127 firemedics and/or firemedics/
paramedics, such additional officers and employees as are established by
ordinance and law.
   Each firemedic and/or firemedic/paramedic in the Fire Division shall be a
paid, full-time employee of the city of Springfield who is assigned to that
position for no fewer than forty (40) hours per week who is pursuing or who has
successfully completed a firefighter training program approved and established
pursuant to Ohio law.
   The City Manager shall fill firemedic and/or firemedic/paramedic vacancies
no later than twenty-one (21) days after a vacancy in said position occurs.
   The foregoing provision shall become effective and a part of the Charter of
The City of Springfield on the thirtieth (30th) day after approval by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
(Amended 11-6-90, Ord. No. 90-473, Yeas 11,810; Nays 6,108.)
 
SECTION 94.  FEES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   No fees or assessments can be made by the City Commission for the operation,
collection or disposal of residential refuse.  No fees or assessments can be
made by the City Commission for the operation or maintenance of street lights.
   All fees and assessments related to residential refuse or street lights must
be presented by the City Commission to the electorate in a general election.
(Enacted 5-5-87, Ord. No. 87-118.)
 
SECTION 95.  POLICE DIVISION; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
   There shall be levied an additional tax for the benefit of The City of
Springfield, Ohio, at a rate of three (3) mills for each one dollar ($1.00) of
valuation, which amounts to thirty cents ($0.30) for each one hundred dollars
($100.00) of valuation, which shall be for the specific purpose of hiring,
training, maintaining and supporting twenty-four (24) additional sworn, full-
time police officers within the Springfield Police Division.
   The Levy shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years upon the
approval by a majority of the electors voting thereon and shall be renewable in
five (5) year increments by a majority of the electors voting thereon, and
shall commence in tax year 1990, first half.
   The City shall have accomplished the hiring of these additional police
officers specified herein no later than December 31st, 1992.  After December
31st, 1992, and for the duration of this assessment, the Springfield Police
Division shall consist of no fewer than one hundred and twenty-four (124) full-
time sworn police officers, and a minimum of six (6) such officers shall be
assigned to the narcotics unit.  Only a person who is pursuing, or who has
successfully completed, an appropriate police officer training program approved
and established pursuant to state law, shall hold one of the one hundred and
twenty-four (124) police officer positions stated herein.
   All monies generated by this assessment and received by the city of
Springfield shall be placed in a separate interest-bearing fund, and any and
all interest accrued remain in such fund.  Any monies withdrawn from this fund
by The City of Springfield shall be used only for the specific purposes stated
herein, namely:  hiring, training, maintaining, and supporting twenty-four (24)
additional sworn full-time police officers within the Springfield Police
Division.
   The foregoing provision shall become effective and a part of the Charter of
The City of Springfield on the thirtieth (30th) day after approval by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
(Enacted 5-8-90, Ord. No. 90-131, Yeas 6,264; Nays 4,791.)
 
SECTION 96.  POLICE DIVISION; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
   There shall be levied a renewal tax for the benefit of The City of
Springfield, Ohio, at a rate of three (3) mills for each one dollar ($1.00) of
valuation, which amounts to thirty cents ($0.30) for each one hundred dollars
($100.00) of valuation, which shall be for the specific purpose of hiring,
training, maintaining, and supporting at least twenty-four (24) sworn, full-
time police officers within the Springfield Police Division.
   The levy shall remain in effect for a period of six (6) years upon the
approval by a majority of the electors voting thereon, and shall be renewable
in six-year increments by a majority of the electors voting thereon, and shall
commence in tax year 1995, first half.
   For the duration of this assessment, the Springfield Police Division shall
consist of no fewer than one hundred and twenty-four (124) full-time sworn
police officers, and a minimum of six (6) such officers shall be assigned to
the Narcotics Unit.  Only a person who is pursuing, or has successfully
completed, an appropriate police officer training program approved and
established pursuant to State law, shall hold one of the one hundred and
twenty-four (124) police officer positions stated herein.
   All monies generated by this assessment and received by The City of
Springfield shall be placed in a separate interest-bearing fund, and any and
all interest accrued remain in such fund.  Any monies withdrawn from this fund
by The City of Springfield shall be used only for the specific purposes stated
herein, namely:  hiring, training, maintaining, and supporting twenty-four (24)
sworn, full-time police officers within the Springfield Police Division.  No
moneys withdrawn from this fund by The City of Springfield may be used to pay
for the salaries or benefits of the first one-hundred (100) sworn, full-time
police officers within the Springfield Police Division, unless such position
has become necessary to support officers hired pursuant to the May, 1990,
police levy, or this levy.
   The foregoing provision shall become effective and a part of the Charter of
The City of Springfield, Ohio, on the thirtieth (30th) day after approval by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
(Enacted 5-2-95, Ord. No. 95-70, Yeas 4,605; Nays 1,708.)
 
SECTION 97.  POLICE DIVISION; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
   There shall be levied a renewal tax for the benefit of The City of
Springfield, Ohio, at a rate of three (3) mills for each one dollar ($1.00) of
valuation, which amounts to thirty cents ($0.30) for each one hundred dollars
($100.00) of valuation, which shall be for the specific purpose of hiring,
training, maintaining, and supporting at least twenty-four (24) sworn, full-
time police officers within the Springfield Police Division.
   The levy shall remain in effect until such time as it is amended or repealed
pursuant to
Section 83 of the Charter upon the approval of a majority of the electors
voting thereon, and shall commence in tax year 2001, first half.
   For the duration of this assessment, the Springfield Police Division shall
consist of no fewer than one hundred and twenty-four (124) full-time sworn
police officers, and a minimum of six (6) such officers shall be assigned to
the Narcotics Unit.  Only a person who is pursuing, or has successfully
completed, an appropriate police officer training program approved and
established pursuant to State law, shall hold one of the one hundred and
twenty-four (124) police officer positions stated herein.
   All monies generated by this assessment and received by The City of
Springfield shall be placed in a separate interest-bearing fund, and any and
all interest accrued remain in such fund.  Any monies withdrawn from this fund
by The City of Springfield shall be used only for the specific purposes stated
herein, namely:  hiring, training, maintaining, and supporting twenty-four (24)
sworn, full-time police officers within the Springfield Police Division.  No
moneys withdrawn from this fund by The City of Springfield may be used to pay
for the salaries or benefits of the first one-hundred (100) sworn, full-time
police officers within the Springfield Police Division, unless such position
has become necessary to support officers hired pursuant to the May 1990 police
levy, the May 1995 police levy, or this levy.
   The foregoing provision shall become effective and a part of the Charter of
The City of Springfield, Ohio, on the thirtieth (30th) day after approval by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
(Enacted 5-8-01, Ord. No. 01-50, Yeas 2,851; Nays 1,204.)
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART ONE--ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
TITLE ONE--General Provisions
Chap.   
101.   Codified Ordinances.
Chap.   
107.  Territorial Jurisdiction.
Chap.   
109.  Open Meetings.
TITLE THREE--Legislative
Chap.   
111.  City Commission.
Chap.   
113.  Clerk of the City Commission.
Chap.   
115.  Public Emergency.
TITLE FIVE--Administrative
Chap.   
121.  City Manager.
Chap.   
123.  Department of Law.
Chap.   
125.  Department of Finance.
Chap.   
127.  Department of Central Services.
Chap.   
128.  Department of Information Technology.
Chap.   
129.  Department of Community Development.
Chap.   
130.  Department of Engineering.  (Repealed)
Chap.   
133.  Department of Parks, Recreation, and Facilities.
Chap.   
135.  Department of Personnel.
Chap.   
137.  Department of Public Health.
Chap.   
139.  Department of Public Safety.
Chap.   
140.  Institutional Special Police Officers.
Chap.   
141.  Service Department.
Chap.   
145.  Municipal Contracts.
Chap.   
147.  Municipal Finances.
Chap.   
149.  Municipal Property.
Chap.   
151.  Issue and Sale of Bonds and Notes.
Chap.   
153.  Disadvantaged and Minority Business Enterprises.
Chap.   
155.  City Contracts and Affirmative Action.
TITLE SEVEN--Boards and Commissions
Chap.   
157.  Planning Board.
Chap.   
163.  Civil Service Commission.
Chap.   
165.  Airport Advisory Board.
Chap.   
167.  Mediation Board.
Chap.   
169.  Wrestling Commission.
Chap.   
170.  Police Community Relations Advisory Group.
Chap.   
171.  Human Relations Board and Regulations.
Chap.   
172.  Community Advisory Review Board.
Chap.   
173.  Fair Housing Board and Regulations.
Chap.   
174.  ADA Transportation Advisory Committee.
TITLE NINE--Employment Provisions
Chap.
175.  Employee Classification Compensation Plan.
Chap.
185.  Fringe Benefits.
Chap.
187.  Fidelity Bonds.
Chap.
188.  Police Division.
Chap.
189.  Promotional Examinations for Police and Fire Divisions.
TITLE ELEVEN--Judicial
Chap.
191.  Municipal Court.
TITLE THIRTEEN--Taxation
Chap.
195.  Tax on Earned Income.
Chap.
196.  Municipal Income Tax on Earned Income.
Chap.
197.  Hotel Excise Tax.
Chap.
199.  Motor Vehicle License Tax.
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART ONE - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
TITLE ONE - General Provisions
Chap.
101.  Codified Ordinances.
Chap.
107.  Territorial Jurisdiction.
Chap.
109.  Open Meetings.
CHAPTER 101
Codified Ordinances
 
101.01   Designation; citation; headings.
101.02   General definitions.
101.03   Rules of construction.
101.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal.
101.05   Construction of section references.
101.06   Conflicting provisions.
101.07   Determination of legislative intent.
101.08   Severability.
101.99   General penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Statute of limitations on prosecutions - see Ohio R.C. 718.06;  GEN. OFF.
501.06
Codification in book form - see Ohio R.C. 731.23
Imprisonment until fine and costs are paid - see Ohio  R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
Citation issuance for minor misdemeanors - see Ohio  R.C. 2935.26 et seq.
Rules of construction for offenses and penalties - see GEN. OFF.
501.04
 
101.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   (a)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the Municipality
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio, 1991 for which designation "Codified
Ordinances" may be substituted.  Code, title, chapter and section headings do
not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.01)
   (b)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified.  Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic
Code".  Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "Section"
followed by the number, such as "Section
101.01".   
   (c)  The numbering format for the Codified Ordinances shall commence with a
whole number for Chapters, decimal numbers for sections, lower case letters for
subsections and so on in conformity with the format used for the Ohio Revised
Code.
101.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless another definition is provided or
the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   "And" may be read "or", and "or" may be read "and", if the sense
requires it.
      (ORC 1.02(F))
   (b)   "Another" when used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
      (ORC 1.02(B))
   (c)   "Bond" includes an undertaking and "undertaking" includes a bond. 
(ORC 1.02(D), (E))
   (d)   "Commission" means the legislative authority of the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
   (e)   "County" means Clark County, Ohio.
   (f)   "Keeper" or "proprietor" includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (g)   "Land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of an
incorporeal nature.
      (ORC 701.01(F))
   (h)   "Municipality" or "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (i)   "Oath" includes affirmation and "swear" includes affirm. 
      (ORC 1.59(B))
   (j)   "Owner", when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   (k)   “Parachurch organization” is a non-profit entity organized for a
religious purpose, engaged in activity consistent with and in furtherance of
that purpose that holds itself out to the public as religious or faith-based
and is not engaged primarily in commercial activity.
   (l)   "Person" includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership and association.
      (ORC 1.59(C))
   (m)   "Premises", as applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (n)   "Property" means real and personal property.
      (ORC 1.59(E))
      "Personal property" includes all property except real.
      "Real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (o)   "Public authority" includes boards of education; the Municipal,
County, State or Federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any
duly authorized public official.
   (p)   "Public place" includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (q)   "Registered mail" includes certified mail and "certified mail"
includes registered mail.
      (ORC 1.02(G))
   (r)   "Rule" includes regulation.  (ORC 1.59(F))
   (s)   "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (t)   “Sexual orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived
heterosexuality, bisexuality, homosexuality or gender identity, by orientation
or practice by and between consenting adults.
   (u)   "This State" or "the State" means the State of Ohio.
      (ORC 1.59(G))
   (v)   "Street" includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the Municipality.
   (w)   "Tenant" or "occupant", as applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of such premises, alone or with others.
   (x)   "Whoever" includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; 
principals, agents and employees;  and all officials, public or private.
      (ORC 1.02(A))
   (y)   "Written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures.  This provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.
      (ORC 1.59(J))
      (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
101.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and Technical Usage.  Words and phrases shall be read in
context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. 
Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether
by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
 
   (b)   Singular and Plural; Gender; Tense.  As used in the Codified
Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
         (ORC 1.43)
 
   (c)   Calendar; Computation of Time.
      (1)   Definitions.
         A.   "Week" means seven consecutive days.
         B.   "Year" means twelve consecutive months.
            (ORC 1.44)
      (2)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
         (ORC 1.45)
      (3)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
         When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the
last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day, then
such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday.  If any legal holiday falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day
is a legal holiday.
         (ORC 1.14)
      (4)   When legislation is to take effect or become operative from and
after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.
         (ORC 1.15)
      (5)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such duty or compliance with such notice.
 
   (d)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may by law
as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
 
   (e)   Joint Authority.  All words purporting to give joint authority to
three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with State statute or Charter provisions.
 
   (f)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any law
which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
 
101.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
 
   (b)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(ORC 1.54)
 
   (c)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in subsection (d) hereof:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and
the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the
ordinance had not been repealed or amended.
 
   (d)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
 
101.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   A reference to any portion of the Codified Ordinances applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(ORC 1.55)
 
   (b)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(ORC 1.56)
 
   (c)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
series of sections or of subsections of a section, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any section or subsection included in such
reference.
   References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case, action
taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by the Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.23)
 
101.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (a)   If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a
number, the words govern.
(ORC 1.46)
 
   (b)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both.  If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(ORC 1.51)
 
   (c)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are
irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments
are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each.  If the
amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment
prevails.  The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an
earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier
amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.  Amendments
are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into
simultaneous operation.
      (ORC 1.52)
 
101.07  DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (a)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the State and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended;
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
         (ORC 1.47)
 
   (b)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(ORC 1.48)
 
   (c)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of Council may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction;
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
         (ORC 1.49)
 
101.08  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect the other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50)
 
101.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the
Municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00).  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
 
CHAPTER 107
Territorial Jurisdiction
 
107.01   Police and sanitary regulations outside City.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Police jurisdiction outside City - see Ohio R.C. 715.50
Operation of airfields - see Ohio R.C. 717.01(V)
Fire protection outside City limits - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
955
 
107.01  POLICE AND SANITARY REGULATIONS OUTSIDE CITY.
   Provisions and requirements of all ordinances and resolutions of the City,
whether now in effect or hereafter enacted or adopted relating to, or involving
the exercise of, or providing for the enforcement of, or prescribing penalties
for the violation of police and sanitary regulations and powers of the City
within its corporate limits shall be and the same hereby are extended, to the
extent that the same are or may be applicable to the protection thereof, to all
lands owned and used by the City, whether the same are situated within or
without the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 69-182.  Passed 10-20-69.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 109
Open Meetings
 
109.01   Meetings to be open; compliance with State law.
109.02   Notice of meetings.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
State law provisions - see Ohio R.C. 121.22
City Commission meetings - see ADM.
111.01
 
109.01  MEETINGS TO BE OPEN; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   All meetings, except executive sessions, of the City Commission and other
boards, commissions and committees of the City are open to the public.  The
City Commission and other boards, commissions and committees of the City shall
comply with Ohio R.C. 121.22 as presently in effect, or hereafter enacted.
(Ord. 90-158.  Passed 3-13-90.)
109.02  NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   The City Clerk shall cause notice of meetings held by public bodies created
under the City's municipal powers as follows:
   (a)   Notice of the time and place of regularly scheduled meetings for each
such public body shall be:
      (1)   Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the
community within seven (7) days after the public body has established a
schedule, or amendment thereto, of its regularly scheduled meetings.
      (2)   Published by mail to those persons making a written request to the
City Clerk to be notified in advance of meetings and providing the City with a
self-addressed envelope with sufficient postage thereon to mail such
notification.
   (b)   At least twenty-four (24) hours advance notice of the time, place, and
purpose of special meetings of a public body shall be given as follows:
      (1)   Published on the bulletin boards located on floors 2, 3, and 4 of
City Hall.
      (2)   Published by giving telephone notice to news media agencies that
have requested notification of special meetings.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b), in the event a
special meeting is called to deal with an emergency requiring immediate
official action, where it is not possible to give twenty-four (24) hours
advance notice of the meeting, the City Clerk shall give notice described in
paragraph (b) as quickly as practicable.
   (d)   The City Clerk is authorized to delegate the duty to give notice in
accordance with the requirements of this section to the person appointed as
secretary by a public body.
      (Ord. 00-46, Passed 2-15-00; Ord. 12-339, Passed 12-4-12.)
TITLE THREE - Legislative
Chap.
111.  City Commission.
Chap.
113.  Clerk of the City Commission.
Chap.
115.  Public Emergency.
CHAPTER 111
City Commission
 
111.01   Meetings.
111.02   Procedure for lease, sale or conveyance of City owned property.
111.03   Salary of City Commission members; Compensation Board.
111.04   Member of City employee’s family defined.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
The City Commission--see CHTR.
Sec. 4 et seq.
Meetings--see CHTR.
Sec. 14
Ordinances--see CHTR.
Sec. 17 et seq.
Disqualifications--see CHTR.
Sec. 86
Powers of municipal councils--see Ohio R.C. 731.05 et seq.; 731.43
Clerk of City Commission--see ADM. Ch.
113
 
111.01  MEETINGS.
   The City Hall Forum is the usual place for holding regular meetings of the
City Commission.
   The meeting following a regular municipal election for newly elected
Commissioners to assume the duties of their office shall be held as required
Section 14 of the Charter. Other meetings shall be held in accordance with an
annual calendar which the City Commission shall adopt by motion. Said motion
shall specifically identify any meeting not held on a Tuesday, the Commission’s
regular day for meeting, or any meeting not commencing at 7 p.m., the
Commission’s regular time for convening its meetings. The calendar of meetings
shall be made available to the public.
   The City Commission’s calendar of meetings shall comply with the further
requirement of
Section 14 of the Charter, to assure that the City Commission meets not less
than 48 times within any calendar year and with no meeting being more than two
weeks following the immediately preceding meeting.
   The Commission may determine, by motion, to change the location, time, or
date for any meeting on its calendar of meetings, provided notice of the time,
date, and place of such meeting is given in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 91-291, passed 7-16-91; Ord. 13-14, passed 1-22-13.)
111.02  PROCEDURE FOR LEASE, SALE OR CONVEYANCE OF CITY OWNED PROPERTY.
   The City Commission may, by ordinance, authorize the lease, sale or
conveyance of any real or personal property owned by the City, when such
property is not needed for any municipal purpose, and may prescribe the terms
and conditions of any such lease, sale or conveyance.  Such lease, sale, or
conveyance may be authorized with or without provision for advertisement or
competitive bidding at the discretion of the City Commission.
(Ord. 69-142.  Passed 8-25-69.)
 
111.03  SALARY OF CITY COMMISSION MEMBERS; COMPENSATION BOARD.
   (a)   The Mayor of the City shall receive an annual salary effective January
1, 2019, of $14,688. The Assistant Mayor of the City shall receive an annual
salary effective January 1, 2019, of $11,634. The remaining members of the City
Commission shall receive an annual salary effective January 1, 2019, of
$11,019.
(Ord. 07-318. Passed 10-30-07; Ord. 11-296. Passed 10-25-11; Ord. 18-284.
Passed 11-5-18.)
 
   (b)   The Mayor with consent of the City Commission shall appoint five
electors of the City to a Compensation Board which is hereby established. 
Three members of the Board shall serve for an initial term of two years
commencing July 1, 1990, or until their successors are appointed, and two
members of the Board shall serve for an initial term of four years commencing
July 1, 1990, or until their successors are appointed.  Thereafter, members of
the Board shall serve for a term of four years, or until their successors are
appointed. A member of a City employee’s family, as defined in Section
111.04, shall not be eligible for service.
(Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
 
   (c)   The Compensation Board shall from time to time elect a chairperson
from its membership.  No person shall serve as a member of the Board for more
than two consecutive terms.  No person shall continue to serve as a member of
the Board who fails to maintain the qualifications of an elector of the City. 
A person appointed to fill a vacancy to the Board shall serve for the unexpired
term of the vacancy.
 
   (d)   One member of the Compensation Board shall represent the labor
community, one member shall represent the business community and three members
shall represent the community-at-large.  On or before November 30, 1990, and at
least quadrennially thereafter, the Board shall meet to consider the salary and
compensation of the Mayor, the Assistant Mayor, and members of the City
Commission.
 
   (e)   No later than October 1 of each year thereafter that the Compensation
Board meets, the Board shall prepare a report to the City Commission setting
forth its recommendations of compensation for the Mayor, Assistant Mayor and
members of the City Commission.  The City Commission shall, within thirty days
of receiving the Board's report, either approve it by ordinance or, in the
event a majority of the City Commission is not in favor thereof, reject it. 
The proposal may not be amended or modified. 
(Ord. 99-314.  Passed 10-5-99.)
 
111.04  MEMBER OF CITY EMPLOYEE’S FAMILY DEFINED.
   The definition of member of a City employee’s family includes, but is not
limited to: parents and stepparents, grandparents, spouse, children and
stepchildren (whether dependent or not), grandchildren, and siblings,
regardless of where they live.  Any other individual related to a City
Commissioner or a City employee, by blood or marriage is a member of the City
employee’s family if he or she lives in the same household with the City
Commissioner or City employee.
(Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
CHAPTER 113
Clerk of the City Commission
 
113.01   Establishment and duties.
113.02   Other employees.
113.03   Codification of ordinances.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Charter provisions - see CHTR.
Sec. 13
Duties concerning proclamations - see ADM.
115.02
Codification of ordinances - see  ADM.
101.01(c)
 
113.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   There shall be a Clerk of the City Commission who shall:
   (a)   Keep a regular and correct journal of the proceedings of the City
Commission; have the custody of all laws and ordinances of the City, carefully
record the same in the proper books  for that purpose; and see that all
ordinances, resolutions, notices, and other matters requiring publication are
properly and correctly published, as provided by law.  Such Clerk shall also
serve as Clerk of all municipal boards to which he may be appointed but shall
receive no additional compensation therefor.
   (b)   The Clerk shall perform such other duties as are or may hereafter be
required by law, ordinance, or order of the City Commission.
      (Ord. 59-102.  Passed 6-15-59.)
 
113.02  OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   There shall be such assistant and deputy clerks, or other employees, as the
City Commission may from time to time appoint and employ.
(Ord. 59-102.  Passed 6-15-59.)
 
113.03  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (a)   When an amendment is made to the Codified Ordinances of the City and
is filed with the Clerk of the City Commission, such Clerk shall examine the
same and if the numbering of the sections and paragraphs in such amendment is
not in conformity with the codified ordinance numbering system pursuant to
Section
101.01(c), the Clerk shall give the sections and paragraphs in the amendment
their proper sectional number.  Such number given by the City Clerk shall be
the official code number of the section and any subparagraphs.  Numbers
assigned shall be published in supplements to the Codified Ordinances of
Springfield, Ohio, volumes, which will be made available to the public at cost,
as determined by the City's Finance Director.  Sections of the Codified
Ordinances shall be cited and referred to by such official numbers.
(Ord. 91-396.  Passed 10-1-91.)
 
   (b)   When an amendment is made to the Codified Ordinances of the City and
is filed with the Clerk of the City Commission, such Clerk shall examine the
same and if the amendment changes the title of a public official mentioned in
the Codified Ordinances, the Clerk shall search the text of the entire Codified
Ordinances and change the titles of public officials therein contained to
conform to the new titles given to such public official in the said amendment
made to the Codified Ordinances.  Subdivisions of the Codified Ordinances
containing titles of public officials which have been changed by the Clerk
pursuant to this Section
113.03(b) shall be published in supplements to the Codified Ordinances of
Springfield, Ohio, volumes, which will be made available to the public at cost,
as determined by the City's Finance Director.
(Ord. 05-106.  Passed 4-12-05.)
CHAPTER 115
Public Emergency
 
115.01   Proclamations; issuance and content.
115.02   Publication by Clerk.
115.03   Violation a misdemeanor.
115.04   Report to Commission.
115.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Proclamations - see CHTR.
Sec. 7
Riot - see GEN. OFF.
509.01
Failure to disperse - see GEN. OFF.
509.02
 
115.01  PROCLAMATIONS; ISSUANCE AND CONTENT.
   Whenever, pursuant to
Section 7 of the City Charter, the Mayor issues a proclamation declaring a
state of public danger and emergency to exist in the City, such proclamation
shall state the presence of such danger and emergency; the causes therefor, if
known; the period during which such proclamation shall be in force and effect;
the rules, regulations and directives to be followed by persons in the City;
and the specific prohibitions of action, if any, by persons in the City during
the period of such proclamation.
(Ord. 53-136.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
115.02  PUBLICATION BY CLERK.
   It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the City Commission to cause such
proclamation to be published, in full, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City within ten days after the issuance thereof.
(Ord. 53-136.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
115.03  VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any specific rule, regulation,
directive or prohibition of any proclamation issued by the Mayor pursuant to
Section 7 of the City Charter and Section
115.01.
(Ord. 53-136.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
115.04  REPORT TO COMMISSION.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to make a report of such proclamation to
the City Commission at the first regular meeting of the City Commission held
after the issuance thereof.  Such report shall be placed upon the journal
record of the City Commission.
(Ord. 53-136.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
115.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates Section
115.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
 
 
 
TITLE FIVE--Administrative
Chap.
121.  City Manager.
Chap.
123.  Department of Law.
Chap.
125.  Department of Finance.
Chap.
127.  Department of Central Services.
Chap.
129.  Department of Community Development.
Chap.
130.  Department of Engineering.  (Repealed)
Chap.
133.  Department of Parks and Recreation.
Chap.
135.  Department of Personnel.
Chap.
137.  Department of Public Health.
Chap.
139.  Department of Public Safety.
Chap.
140.  Institutional Special Police Officers.
Chap.
141.  Service Department.
Chap.
145.  Municipal Contracts.
Chap.
147.  Municipal Finances.
Chap.
149.  Municipal Property.
Chap.
151.  Issue and Sale of Bonds and Notes.
Chap.
153.  Disadvantaged and Minority Business Enterprises.
Chap.
155.  City Contractors and Affirmative Action.
CHAPTER 121
City Manager
 
121.01   Administrative head; duties.
121.02   Office established.
121.03   Collective bargaining grievances.
121.04   Cablevision; local government channel.
121.05   Economic development benefit application fee.
121.06   Brownfield site priority list.
121.07   Annexation of City property.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Appointment--see CHTR.
Sec. 9
Removal--see CHTR.
Sec. 10
Powers and duties--see CHTR.
Sec. 21
Absence--see CHTR.
Sec. 22
Political activity - see CHTR.
Sec. 87
121.01  ADMINISTRATIVE HEAD; DUTIES.
   (a)   The City Manager is the administrative head of the City.  The City
Manager shall manage the City and perform such other duties as required by City
Charter or ordinance. 
 
   (b)   The City Manager and Assistant City Manager are authorized to
determine, based upon an appraisal obtained on behalf of the City, just
compensation, fair market value, and fair market value estimates for the
purpose of making a proposal on behalf of the City for the acquisition of
interests in real property needed for municipal purposes.  No proposal made by
a City Manager or Assistant City Manager shall become contractually binding on
the City until the City Commission has adopted an ordinance authorizing the
expenditure pertaining to such proposal when such authorization is mandated by
the Charter of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 04-190.  Passed 6-15-04.)
 
121.02  OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   The office of the City Manager is established by the City Charter.  The
office consists of the City Manager and such other officers and employees as
are appointed.  The office shall assist the City Manager to manage the City and
perform such other duties as required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
121.03  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING GRIEVANCES.
   The City Manager is authorized to settle a grievance between the City and a
collective bargaining unit recognized by the City, or any employee or group of
employees represented by such collective bargaining unit, in an amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000).  In settling any such grievance, the City
Manager, or his authorized designee, shall comply with the terms of the
collective bargaining agreement in effect between the City and the collective
bargaining unit at the time such grievance is first submitted in writing to the
City.  The City Manager may settle pursuant to this section multiple grievances
involving the same dispute or controversy or a single grievance involving
multiple claimants provided that the total amount paid in settlement does not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000).
(Ord. 89-408.  Passed 7-18-89.)
 
121.04  CABLEVISION; LOCAL GOVERNMENT CHANNEL.
   The City Manager is authorized to enter into agreements, on behalf of the
City, to obtain programming to be aired on any local government access channel
made available by cablevision franchisees in the City. Such agreements shall
provide for programming which publishes accurate information on local municipal
government affairs, on matters which would promote the public peace, health,
safety, welfare and attractiveness of the community and on matters which would
promote responsible citizenship in the community.  Such agreements shall not
obligate the City to the expenditure of funds and shall be terminable by the
City unilaterally upon no more than thirty (30) days notice.
(Ord. 91-36.  Passed 1-29-91.)
 
121.05  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BENEFIT APPLICATION FEES.
   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the City Manager may establish
application fees of up to $250 per application for economic development benefit
applications filed with the City.  The City Manager shall establish a list of
economic development benefit applications and associated fees in the City
Manager's Journal.
(Ord. 95-228.  Passed 6-27-95.)
 
121.06  TAX BASE REVITALIZATION INCENTIVE SITE PRIORITY LIST.
   The City Manager shall establish a Tax Base Revitalization Incentive Site
Priority List which shall be a list of Tax Base Revitalization Incentive Sites
in the City or on property owned by the City which have one or more of the
following characteristics:
   (a)   The site is a likely candidate for remediation of environmental
contamination under Chapter 3746 of the Ohio Revised Code,
   (b)   The site is likely to become a site for new employment in the City as
a result of economic development assistance from the City government,
   (c)   The site owner or lessee has entered into contractually binding
commitments to obtain sufficient funding to significantly expand, renovate, or
redevelop the site, or
   (d)   The site has closed within the previous twelve months and was the
place of employment for twenty or more employees during the twelve months prior
to closing.
When the City Manager adds or deletes a site or sites from the Tax Base
Revitalization Incentive Site Priority List, he shall provide a copy of the new
Tax Base Revitalization Incentive Site Priority List to the members of the City
Commission at their next meeting after the new Tax Base Revitalization
Incentive Site Priority List is established.  The Tax Base Revitalization
Incentive Site Priority List will be used to determine eligibility for certain
development incentives authorized by the City's Codified Ordinances and by
other ordinances adopted by the City Commission from time to time and for
prioritizing the investment of City staff time and other City resources in
fostering the economic development of Tax Base Revitalization Incentive Sites. 
The term "Tax Base Revitalization Incentive Site" means an abandoned, idled, or
under-utilized commercial or industrial site where expansion, renovation, or
redevelopment is unlikely due to real or suspected environmental contamination
or due to deteriorated public infrastructure serving the site or the blight
conditions in the vicinity of the site.
(Ord. 98-43.  Passed 2-24-98.)
 
121.07  ANNEXATION OF CITY PROPERTY.
   It is the policy of the City that all City-owned property be included within
the corporate boundary of the City as the opportunity arises to annex such
property to the City.  The City Manager is authorized to sign, on behalf of the
City, any annexation petition requesting annexation of City-owned property to
the City and appointing an annexation agent to act on behalf of the City in
prosecuting such annexation.  The City Manager may delay initiating an
annexation and may decline to sign an annexation petition, which the City
Manager has not been specifically directed to sign by ordinance, if the City
Manager determines that delaying annexation of City-owned property for a time
would better further the purpose of the City's policy or would facilitate
successful prosecution of annexation petitions of other property owners likely
to request annexation of their property to the City in the future.
(Ord. 96-344.  Passed 10-1-96.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 123
Department of Law
 
123.01   Law Director; duties.
123.02   Department established.
123.03   Civil Law Division.
123.04   Criminal Law Division.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Established - see CHTR.
Sec. 23
Statutory duties - see Ohio R.C. 733.51 et seq.
Conflict of interest - see Ohio R.C. 120.39
 
123.01  LAW DIRECTOR; DUTIES.
   The Law Director is the City's attorney and counselor at law.  The Law
Director shall provide legal representation and advice to the City and perform
such other duties as required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
123.02  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Department of Law is established by City Charter.  The Department
consists of the Law Director and such other attorneys and employees as are
appointed.  The Department shall assist the Law Director to represent and
advise the City in all civil, criminal and administrative law matters;
prosecute criminal cases in the Clark County Municipal Court; and perform such
other duties as required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
123.03  CIVIL LAW DIVISION.
   A Civil Law Division of the Department of Law is hereby established.  The
Civil Law Division shall represent and advise the City in all civil and
administrative law matters.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
123.04  CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION.
   A Criminal Law Division of the Department of Law is hereby established.  The
Criminal Law Division shall prosecute criminal cases in the Clark County
Municipal Court and represent and advise the City in all criminal law matters.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 125
Department of Finance
 
125.01   Finance Director; duties.
125.02   Department established.
125.03   Accounting Division.
125.04   Income Tax Division.
125.05   Purchasing Division.
125.06   Treasury Division.
125.07   Utility Billing Division.
125.08   Late filing of tax returns; first offense.
125.09   Depository and safekeeping agreements.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Appointment of Director - see CHTR.
Sec. 2
Finances - see CHTR.
Sec. 32 et seq.
Contracts - see ADM. Ch.
145
Municipal finances - see ADM. Ch.
147
Issue and sale of bonds and notes - see ADM. Ch.
151
 
125.01  FINANCE DIRECTOR; DUTIES.
   (a)   The Finance Director is the City's fiscal officer.  The Finance
Director shall manage the City's finances and perform such other duties as
required by City Charter or ordinance.
 
   (b)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to waive interest on utility
bills of customers when the Finance Director finds that late payment was due to
excusable neglect on the part of a customer who has not established a pattern
of failing to pay utility bills on time or in those cases in which the
customer's failure to pay on time was due to circumstances beyond the
customer's control.
(Ord. 93-127.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
125.02  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Department of Finance is established by City Charter.  The Department
consists of the Finance Director and such other officers and employees as are
appointed.  The Department shall assist the Finance Director to manage the
City's finances; perform accounting and auditing services for the City; make
purchases, solicit bids and negotiate contracts for the City; sell City
property as authorized; administer and enforce the City's earned income tax
ordinances; collect, invest and disburse City moneys; assess and collect for
utility services provided by the City; and perform such other duties as
required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.03  ACCOUNTING DIVISION.
   An Accounting Division of the Department of Finance is hereby established. 
The Accounting Division shall perform accounting and auditing services for the
City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.04  INCOME TAX DIVISION.
   An Income Tax Division of the Department of Finance is hereby established as
provided in Section
195.13.  The Income Tax Division shall administer and enforce the City's earned
income tax ordinances.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.05  PURCHASING DIVISION.
   A Purchasing Division of the Department of Finance is hereby established. 
The Purchasing Division shall make purchases, solicit bids and negotiate
contracts for the City and sell City property as authorized.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.06  TREASURY DIVISION.
   A Treasury Division of the Department of Finance is hereby established.  The
Treasury Division shall collect, invest and disburse City moneys.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.07  UTILITY BILLING DIVISION.
   A Utility Billing Division of the Department of Finance is hereby
established.  The Utility Billing Division shall assess and collect for utility
services provided by the City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
125.08  LATE FILING OF TAX RETURNS; FIRST OFFENSE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
195.08(c), the Tax Commissioner shall waive all but ten percent (10%) of the
penalty imposed pursuant to Section
195.10(b)(3) for taxpayers who are first-time offenders in failing to file
their tax returns when due.
(Ord. 93-248.  Passed 7-13-93.)
 
125.09  DEPOSITORY AND SAFEKEEPING AGREEMENTS.
   The Finance Director is authorized to execute, on behalf of the City,
depository agreements, banking services agreements, and agreements obtaining
the services of a bailee for City funds and investment instruments (commonly
known as safekeeping agreements) with financial institutions; provided, such
agreements do not obligate the City to an expenditure of greater than that
authorized by
Article VI,
Section 42, of the City Charter to be made without City Commission
authorization by ordinance.
(Ord. 04-162.  Passed 05-18-04.)
CHAPTER 127
Department of Central Services
 
127.01   Establishment.
127.02   Repealed by Ord. 93-436.
127.03   Print Shop Division.
127.04   Repealed by Ord. 94-473.
127.05   Airport Division.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority to establish - see CHTR.
Sec. 23
Airport regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
959
 
127.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Department of Central Services is hereby established.  The Department is
administered by the office of City Manager and consists of such officers and
employees as are appointed.  The Department shall maintain Municipal buildings;
operate the print shop; maintain central stores of the City; maintain and
operate the Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport; and perform such other
duties as required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 93-436.  Passed 12-21-93.)
 
127.02  REPEALED BY ORD. 93-436.
 
127.03  PRINT SHOP DIVISION.
   A Print Shop Division of the Department of Central Services is hereby
established.  The Print Shop Division shall operate the City's print shop and
maintain central stores of the City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
127.04  REPEALED BY ORD. 94-473.
 
127.05  AIRPORT DIVISION.
   An Airport Division of the Department of Central Services is hereby
established.  The Airport Division shall maintain and operate the Springfield-
Beckley Municipal Airport.
(Ord. 88-459.  Passed 7-26-88.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 128
Department of Information Technology
 
128.01   Department established.
 
128.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Information Technology is hereby established.  The
Department consists of the Director of Information Technology and such other
officers and employees as are appointed.  The Department shall collect, store,
and disseminate computerized data for use by the various City departments; to
make computerized data available to the public, as required by public records
law; and perform such other duties as are required by the City Charter and
ordinances.
(Ord. 93-436.  Passed 12-21-93.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 129
Department of Community Development
 
129.01   Department established.
129.02   Administrative Division.
129.03   Inspection Services Division.
129.04   Code Enforcement Division.
129.05   Repealed by Ord. 08-111, passed April 8, 2008.
129.06   Community Development Block Grant Division.
129.07   Blighted area defined.
129.08   Urban renewal, blighted area defined.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority to establish - see CHTR.
Sec. 23
Building codes - see BLDG. Ch.
1301 et seq.
 
129.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Community Development is hereby established.  The department
consists of the Director of the Department of Community Development and such
other officers and employees as are appointed.  The department shall promote
and protect equal opportunities within the City; administer the fair housing
and human relations ordinances and policies of the City and the Human Relations
Board; administer and enforce the minority business enterprise ordinances of
the City; coordinate and administer the City's housing programs; and coordinate
neighborhood activities. The department shall foster safe and orderly
development within the City; coordinate administration of the department,
coordinate Community Development Block Grant, Urban Development Action Grant,
Economic Development Administration and similar federally-funded economic
development programs and activities; supervise the planning, subdivision, and
zoning responsibilities of the City; administer and enforce the building,
heating, electrical, housing, and property maintenance codes of the City;
coordinate the City's nuisance abatement efforts; and perform such other duties
as required by City Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 08-111.  Passed 4-8-08.)
 
129.02  ADMINISTRATION DIVISION.
   The Administration Division of the Department of Community Development is
hereby established.  The Administration Division shall coordinate the
operations of the Department, work on the redevelopment of specified
neighborhoods, and supervise the planning, subdivision, and zoning
responsibilities of the City.  It will also provide staff for the City Planning
Board and Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 04-347.  Passed 11-23-04.)
 
129.03  INSPECTION SERVICES DIVISION.
   An Inspection Services Division of the Department of Community Development
is hereby established.  The Inspection Services Division shall administer and
enforce the building, heating, and electrical codes of the City and the
contractor licensing program.  It will also provide staff for the Board of
Building Appeals.
(Ord. 04-347.  Passed 11-23-04.)
 
129.04  CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION.
   A Code Enforcement Division of the Department of Community Development is
hereby established.  The Code Enforcement Division shall administer and enforce
the Housing Maintenance Code, enforce the Zoning Code, and work to abate public
nuisances.
(Ord. 04-347.  Passed 11-23-04.)
 
129.05  REPEALED BY ORDINANCE 08-111, PASSED 4-8-08.
 
129.06  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT DIVISION.
   A Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Division of the Department of
Community Development is hereby established.  The CDBG Division shall
coordinate, monitor, and administer funding received from Community Development
Block Grants, and any similar programs, for the benefit of the City and
eligible recipients.  It will also provide staff for the Springfield Historic
Landmarks Commission and the Community Advisory Review Board.
(Ord. 04-347.  Passed 11-23-04.)
 
129.07  BLIGHTED AREA DEFINED.
   (a)   In conjunction with the expenditures of Community Development Block
Grant funds, a "blighted area" shall be defined as follows:  "Blighted area"
means an area within a municipality containing a significant number of
structures which, by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age or
obsolescence, inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation or
open spaces, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, or the existence of conditions
which endanger lives or properties by fire or other hazards and causes, or
which by reason of location in an area with inadequate street layout,
incompatible land uses or land use relationships, overcrowding of buildings on
the land, excessive dwelling unit density, or other identified hazards to
health and safety, are conducive to ill health, transmission of disease,
juvenile delinquency and crime and are detrimental to the public health, morals
and general welfare.
 
   (b)   The Department of Community Development is hereby authorized to adopt,
promulgate, and enforce regulations for applying the definition in subsection
(a) hereof.
(Ord. 04-347.  Passed 11-23-04.)
 
129.08  URBAN RENEWAL, BLIGHTED AREA DEFINED
For purposes of considering an area within the City of Springfield as suitable
for an urban renewal plan, including for the purpose of using eminent domain in
implementing the urban renewal plan, the term "blighted area" means an area
within the City of Springfield containing a majority of structures that have
been extensively damaged or destroyed by a major disaster, or that, by reason
of dilapidation, deterioration, age or obsolescence, inadequate provision for
ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces, unsafe and unsanitary
conditions or the existence of conditions which endanger lives or properties by
fire or other hazards and causes, or that, by reason of location in an area
with inadequate street layout, incompatible land uses or land use
relationships, overcrowding of buildings on the land, excessive dwelling unit
density, or other identified hazards to health and safety, are conducive to ill
health, transmission of disease, juvenile delinquency and crime and are
detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
(Ord. 07-140.  Passed 5-15-07.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 130
Department of Engineering
 
   This chapter has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 19-289 
effective December 24, 2019.
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 131
Department of Human Relations, Housing, and Neighborhood Services
 
NOTE:  CHAPTER REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 08-111, PASSED APRIL 8, 2008.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 133
Department of Parks, Recreation, and Facilities
 
133.01   Department established.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority to establish - see CHTR.
Sec. 23
Board of Parks and Recreation - see ADM. Ch.
161
 
133.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Parks, Recreation, and Facilities is hereby established. 
The Department of Parks, Recreation, and Facilities shall consist of a Director
of Parks, Recreation, and Facilities and such other officers and employees as
are appointed.  The Department shall maintain and operate the City's parks and
recreational facilities and Municipal buildings, and perform such other duties
as required by City Charter and ordinance.
(Ord. 94-473.  Passed 12-20-94.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 135
Department of Personnel
 
135.01   Department established.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority to establish - see CHTR.
Sec. 23
Compensation and employment provisions - see ADM.
Title Nine
Civil service commission - see CHTR.
Sec. 47; ADM. Ch.
163
135.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Personnel is hereby established.  The Department consists of
a Personnel Director and such other officers and employees as are appointed. 
The Department shall assist City departments in the recruitment, hiring,
classification, compensation and disciplining of City employees; administer
contracts with recognized bargaining units; maintain personnel records; and
perform such other duties as required by City Charter and ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 137
Department of Public Health
 
137.01   Department established.
137.02   Environmental Health Services Division.
137.03   Plumbing Inspections Division.
137.04   Public Health Nursing Division.
137.05   Vital Statistics Division.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
City health district - see Ohio R.C. 3705.09 et seq.
Health regulations - see
Part 17 - Health Code
Board of Health - see ADM. Ch.
159
Plumbing regulations - see BLDG. Ch.
1361 et seq.
137.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Public Health is hereby established.  The Department shall
operate under the control and supervision of the Board of Health of the City
Health District and shall consist of a Health Commissioner, Director of
Environmental Health Services, Director of Public Health Nursing, Plumbing
Inspector; and such other health officials and employees as are appointed by
the City Manager in accordance with the recommendations of the Board of Health
and all applicable laws and ordinances.  The Department shall promote and
protect public health within the City; administer the City's Health District;
administer and enforce State and City plumbing codes; take appropriate action
to abate all public health nuisances; compile and maintain a record of births,
deaths and other vital statistics within the City; and, except as otherwise
provided, enforce all ordinances and laws pertaining to public health.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
137.02  ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SERVICES DIVISION.
   An Environmental Health Services Division in the Department of Public Health
is hereby established.  The Environmental Health Services Division is
responsible for food protection, disease control, safe drinking water, sewage
disposal, school health, rabies control, swimming pools, mobile home parks,
solid waste disposal, public health nuisances, institutional health, lead
poisoning and such other programs and duties as assigned to the Division by the
Board of Health or the Health Commissioner and required by State law or City
ordinances.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
137.03  PLUMBING INSPECTIONS DIVISION.
   A Plumbing Inspections Divisions in the Department of Public Health is
hereby established.  The Plumbing Inspections Division shall administer and
enforce State and City plumbing codes.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
137.04  PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING DIVISION.
   A Division of Public Health Nursing in the Department of Public Health is
hereby established.  The Division of Public Health Nursing shall assist the
City Health District's physician in providing for the public health and perform
such other duties assigned to the Division by the Board of Health or the Health
Commissioner and required by State law or City ordinances.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
137.05  VITAL STATISTICS DIVISION.
   A Division of Vital Statistics in the Department of Public Health is hereby
established.  The Division of Vital Statistics shall compile and maintain a
record of births, deaths and other vital statistics within the City and perform
such other duties assigned to the Division by the Board of Health or the Health
Commissioner and required by State law or City ordinances.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
CHAPTER 139
Department of Public Safety
 
139.01   Department established.
139.02   Fire Division.
139.03   Classification of Fire Division personnel.
139.04   Police Division.
139.05   Classification of Police Division personnel.
139.06   Rules and regulations of Fire and Police Divisions.
139.07   Police Auxiliary Unit.
139.08   Police Auxiliary Unit regulations.
139.09   Officers and bylaws of Police Auxiliary Unit.
139.10   Police Chief authorized to execute tax exemption forms.
139.11     Police Chief authorized to Dispose of property.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Police and Fire Divisions - see CHTR.
Sec. 92
Fire protection and emergency services - see CHTR.
Sec. 93
Police Division - see ADM. Ch.
188
Promotional examination - see ADM. Ch.
189
Fire protection outside City - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
955
 
139.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Public Safety is hereby established.  The Department is
administered by the City Manager as Director of Public Safety and consists of a
Fire Chief and a Chief of Police and such other officers and employees as are
appointed.  The Department shall provide fire and police protection for the
City and perform such other duties as required by City Charter and ordinance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
139.02  FIRE DIVISION.
   A Fire Division of the Department of Public Safety is hereby established. 
The Fire Division shall protect persons and property from fire; provide rescue
and emergency services; and foster and promote fire suppression practices.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
139.03  CLASSIFICATION OF FIRE DIVISION PERSONNEL.
   Personnel in the Fire Division are classified according to the following
ranks and positions:
 
 
Uniformed Personnel      Non-uniformed Personnel
Chief                    Clerk Stenographer II
Assistant Chief          Clerk Typist II
Battalion Chiefs         Fire Hydrant Repair Worker
Captains                 Fire Hydrant Maintenance
Lieutenants              Mechanic
Fire Medics/Firefighters  
Paramedics                
   (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
139.04  POLICE DIVISION.
   A Police Division of the Department of Public Safety is hereby established. 
The Police Division shall preserve the peace; protect persons and property; and
enforce all traffic and criminal ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
139.05  CLASSIFICATION OF POLICE DIVISION PERSONNEL.
   Personnel in the Police Division are classified according to the following
ranks and positions:
 
 
Uniformed Personnel Non-uniformed Personnel
Chief               Forensic Criminologist
Captain             Data Processing Supervisor
Lieutenant          Administrative Assistant
Sergeant            Computer Programmer
Patrolman           Records Supervisor
                   Communications Operator
                   Clerk Steno II
                   Clerk Steno I
                   Police Service Clerk
                   Community Service Officers
                   Clerk Typist I
   (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
139.06  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF FIRE AND POLICE DIVISIONS.
   The City Manager, as Director of Public Safety, shall adopt and promulgate
general rules and regulations governing the operation of the Fire and Police
Divisions.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
139.07  POLICE AUXILIARY UNIT.
   A Police Auxiliary Unit of the Police Division of the Department of Public
Safety is hereby established.  The Police Auxiliary Unit consists of qualified
members appointed and removed by the City Manager as Director of Public
Safety.  The Unit shall assist and aid the Police Division and perform such
duties as are assigned to the Unit by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
 
139.08  POLICE AUXILIARY UNIT REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
governing the qualifications, dress, weaponry, conduct, supervision and
discipline of the members of the Police Auxiliary Unit while on duty with the
Police Division.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
139.09  OFFICERS AND BYLAWS OF POLICE AUXILIARY UNIT.
   The Police Auxiliary Unit may elect a captain and subordinate officers of
the Unit.  The Police Auxiliary Unit may adopt bylaws in conformity with the
ordinances and rules and regulations of the City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
139.10  POLICE CHIEF AUTHORIZED TO EXECUTE TAX EXEMPTION FORMS.
   The Chief of the Police Division is authorized to execute, on behalf of the
City, tax exemption forms seeking exemption from Federal excise taxes related
to the purchase of firearms by the City to be used in law enforcement.
(Ord. 93-307.  Passed 9-7-93.)
 
139.11  POLICE CHIEF AUTHORIZED TO DISPOSE OF PROPERTY.
   When property has come into the possession of the Police Division by virtue
of having been stolen and recovered, abandoned, taken into evidence, or
otherwise, the Police Chief may dispose of such property as follows in lieu of
the process stated in Ohio Revised Code §§ 737.29, et seq.:
   (a)   When other applicable law requires a particular manner of disposal,
the Police Chief shall dispose of it as required.
   (b)   When other applicable law permits, but does not require a particular
manner of disposal, the Police Chief may dispose of such property as permitted.
   (c)   When other applicable law does not require a particular manner of
disposal and either:
      (1)   the Police Chief or his subordinates have been unable to identify
the owner of such property despite reasonable efforts to do so, or
      (2)   the owner of such property has failed to reclaim such property
after having been given a reasonable opportunity to do so,
      the Police Chief may dispose of such property on such terms as the Police
Chief reasonably determines are best suited to the nature and condition of the
property being disposed of. 
      (Ord. 18-49. Passed 2-27-18.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 140
Institutional Special Police Officers
 
140.01   Definitions.
140.02   License required.
140.03   Application for license.
140.04   Requirements for institutional special police officer license.
140.05   Issuance of license; expiration.
140.06   Insurance required.
140.07   Reports to police required.
140.08   Powers and duties of institutional special police officers.
140.09   Badge; termination of employment.
140.10   Institutional special police officer not to qualify for police
benefits.
140.11   Oath required.
140.12   Suspension/revocation of license.
140.99   Penalty.
 
140.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Institution" means an educational or medical facility.
   (b)   "Institutional special police officer" means a person who has all the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Is licensed by the City of Springfield;
      (2)   Is commissioned with the power of arrest by the City of
Springfield;
      (3)   Is employed directly by an institution, and is not employed by, or
has his or her services provided to the institution by any agency or security
guard provider as defined in Ohio Revised Code Section 4749.01;
      (4)   Has the authority to carry or wear a firearm while employed by and
performing any of the following duties and functions while on the premises of
the employing institution:
         A.   Investigating matters pertinent to the function or mission of the
institution;
         B.   Protecting persons on the premises of the institution;
         C.   Protecting the property of the institution;
         D.   Enforcing the rules and regulations of the institution relating
to the safety and protection of persons and property.
 
140.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall perform any service as an institutional special police
officer within the City without first obtaining and maintaining in full force
and effect a valid institutional special officer license.
 
   (b)   No person shall wear an institutional special police officer badge, or
represent or hold himself/herself out to be an institutional special police
officer unless he/she is duly licensed as such by the City.
 
140.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Every person desiring to perform the duties of an institutional
special police officer shall submit an application for the license to the Chief
of Police, on a form provided for that purpose.  The applicant shall answer all
questions in the application, and shall include the name and address of the
institution by which they are employed.
 
   (b)   Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall cause to be
made such investigation of the applicant as is necessary to determine whether
the applicant meets the requirements set forth in this chapter.
 
140.04  REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTITUTIONAL SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER LICENSE.
   An applicant for the initial issuance or renewal of an institutional special
police officer license shall meet the following requirements.  The
determination as to whether an applicant meets all such requirements shall be
within the sound discretion of the Chief of Police; all such decisions of the
Chief shall be final.
   (a)   Be an American citizen or a person who has been granted permanent
residency by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, and be able to
speak and read the English language;
   (b)   Be twenty-one (21) or more years of age;
   (c)   Be employed directly by an institution as defined in Section
140.01(a);
   (d)   Be in sound physical condition, have good eyesight, and not subject to
any infirmity, defect or disorder of mind or body which might reasonably render
him or her unfit for the safe carrying out of the duties of an institutional
special police officer, as determined by the Chief of Police from all reliable
medical, psychological, or health information supplied by the applicant or
other persons concerning the applicant's physical or mental condition.  Where
such facts indicate that an applicant is suffering from any such infirmity,
defect or disorder of mind or body, the Chief of Police may require the
applicant, at his or her expense, to be examined by a licensed physician,
psychologist, or psychiatrist and to submit such physician's, psychologist's,
or psychiatrist's written report of such examination to the Chief for use in
determining the applicant's fitness.
   (e)   Possess a training certification from an Ohio Peace Officer's Training
Council approved school indicating successful completion of the basic police
school, including a satisfactory firearms range qualification score on a
practical pistol course with a service firearm.
   (f)   In the case of an applicant for renewal of an institutional special
police officer license, he or she shall submit with the application for
renewal, a certificate issued within the previous twelve (12) months from a
qualified range instructor certifying that the applicant has satisfactorily re-
qualified with his service firearm.
   (g)   Shall not have been convicted of, pled guilty to, or forfeited bond
for any of the following within the last twenty (20) years:
      (1)   Any offense constituting a felony;
      (2)   A misdemeanor involving public disorder, violence, theft or public
indecency;
      (3)   Two (2) or more misdemeanors, other than minor misdemeanors,
neither of which involve public disorder, violence, theft, or public indecency.
 
140.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION.
   (a)   Upon approval of the application, the Chief of Police shall issue a
license to the applicant authorizing that person to perform the duties of an
institutional special police officer.
 
   (b)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless sooner
revoked.
 
   (c)   All applications for renewal of licenses must be filed with the Chief
of Police no sooner than October 1st or later than November 30th of each year.
 
140.06  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every applicant for an institutional special police officer license
shall, prior to the license being issued, submit proof that the institution by
which he or she is employed has comprehensive general liability insurance
coverage in such form as is satisfactory to the Chief of Police, but not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person and three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each occurrence for bodily injury
and personal injury liability, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for property damage liability and naming the City and its officers and
employees as additional insured parties in any claim arising out of the
applicant's activities as an institutional special police officer.  The policy
shall remain in full force and effect during the entire licensing period.
 
   (b)   The policy shall provide, in addition to the aforesaid provisions,
that no notice of any acts creating any liability thereunder will be required
from the City; that the policy shall not be cancelled before ten (10) days
written notice of intention so to cancel has been given to the Chief of Police;
and that the policy shall not be revokable, but shall remain in full force and
effect until ten (10) days have elapsed from the date of service of the written
notice.
 
   (c)   The policy shall be renewed annually to the satisfaction of the Chief
of Police.
 
140.07  REPORTS TO POLICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every institution shall notify the Chief of Police in writing of the
hiring or termination, within ten (10) days thereof, of any employee performing
service as an institutional special police officer.
 
   (b)   Any property found or recovered by any institutional special police
officer shall be reported to the Chief of Police immediately. The institution
shall make available to the Chief of Police upon demand records of property
found or recovered by such institutional special police officer.  Any
misconduct of any institutional special police officer shall be reported to the
Chief of Police immediately.  In the event misconduct of an institutional
special police officer is known to the person in charge of an institution, such
person must submit a report immediately to the Chief of Police; and, if
necessary, appear and bring action against the institutional special police
officer. Failure to comply with the submission of any information as provided
for herein shall be deemed a violation of this Section and considered as just
cause to revoke the license of the institutional special police officer.
 
   (c)   If an institutional special police officer engages in improper conduct
and this conduct is known to a City police office, the police officer shall
report such conduct to his or her commanding officer, who shall take the proper
action and submit a report which will be forwarded to the Chief of Police and
then, in turn, to the person in charge of the institution.
 
140.08  POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSTITUTIONAL SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The powers and duties of all persons licensed under this Chapter shall be as
follows:
   (a)   To obey the orders of the Chief of Police;
   (b)   To be permitted to carry arms and have the power of arrest only when
on duty and in the scope of his or her employment for the institution by which
he or she is employed, and then only in compliance with Ohio Revised Code
Section 2923.12;
   (c)   To obey and comply with all rules and regulations for institutional
special police officers as set forth by the Chief of Police;
   (d)   When on duty and within scope of his or her employment an
institutional special police officer:
      (1)   Must work in a uniform that is approved as to color and style by
the Chief of Police;
      (2)   Must wear a shoulder patch on the left sleeve, bearing the name of
the institution by whom employed, the color and design to be approved by the
Chief of Police;
      (3)   Must wear the institutional special police officer badge issued by
the institution, and approved by the Chief of Police, on the left breast of the
outer most garment;
      (4)   May drive a vehicle in the course of his or her employment only
after the color, equipment, and apparatus have been approved by the Chief of
Police.
   (e)   An institutional special police officer who notifies the Police
Division of the commission of a crime shall not, after such notification,
conduct an investigation into the matter without the consent of the Police
Division.  During an investigation of any crime, the Police Division reserves
the right to stop an institutional special police officer from investigating or
interfering in any way with the Police Division.
   (f)   No institutional special police officer shall fail to comply with any
of the provisions of this Section.
 
140.09  BADGE; TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   At the time of appointment as an institutional special police officer,
a badge shall be issued by the institution.  Upon termination of employment as
an institutional special police officer, no such institutional special police
officer shall fail to surrender the badge to the institution within five (5)
days after such termination.
 
   (b)   Upon termination of employment as an institutional special police
officer, it shall be the joint responsibility of the officer and the
institution by whom he or she is employed to report such termination to the
Police Division.
 
140.10  INSTITUTIONAL SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER NOT TO QUALIFY FOR POLICE
BENEFITS.
   Any police service rendered as an institutional special police officer shall
not qualify such person or assist to qualify such person in any way for
participation in any of the emoluments, privileges, or benefits of the Police
and Firemen Disability and Pension Fund, or any of the benefits or emoluments
received by City police officers or other employees of the City.
 
140.11  OATH REQUIRED.
   Before commencing the duties of an institutional special police officer,
every person so appointed shall take and subscribe to an oath of affirmation
similar to the oath or affirmation administered to the police officers of the
City, which oath or affirmation shall be filed and kept in the office of the
Chief of Police.
 
140.12  SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Chief of Police shall have the right and authority to suspend or revoke
any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter for any of the
following reasons:
   (a)   If such licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter;
   (b)   If such licensee is convicted of any offense specified in Section
140.04(g), except minor traffic violations;
   (c)   If such licensee violates any of the rules and regulations for
institutional special police officers as set forth by the Chief of Police;
   (d)   If such licensee displays an institutional special police officer
badge issued by the City in any employment as an institutional special police
officer outside the corporate limits of the City;
   (e)   If such licensee's physical or mental condition becomes such as to
render him or her unfit for the safe carrying out of the duties of an armed
institutional special police officer, as determined by the Chief of Police
using the criteria set forth in Section
140.04(d).
 
140.99  PENALTY.
   A violation of the provisions of Sections
140.02(a) or (b),
140.08(f), or
140.09(a) shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, punishable as
provided in Section
501.99, and each day such violation is continued shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 92-253.  Passed 8-11-92.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 141
Service Department
 
141.01   Department established.
141.02   Public Works.
141.03   Utilities.
141.04   Engineering.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Street and sidewalk regulations--see S.U. & P.S.
Title One
Trees--see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
907
 
141.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Service Department is hereby established.  The Department consists of the
Service Director and such other officers and employees as are appointed.  All
authority, responsibilities and duties vested in the offices of Director of
Utilities and of Director  of Public Works prior to December 31, 2000, are, on
and after December 31, 2000, vested in the Service Director.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
141.02  PUBLIC WORKS
   The Service Department shall maintain and regulate the use of City streets
and grounds; administer and enforce the City's tree ordinances; maintain the
City's motor vehicles and rolling stock together with an inventory of parts and
supplies; and perform such other duties as required by City Charter and
ordinance.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
141.03  UTILITIES
   The Service Department shall furnish, maintain and operate the City's water
and sewer utilities and perform such other duties as required by City Charter
and ordinance.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
141.04  ENGINEERING
   The Service Department shall provide engineering designs, technical
specifications, cost estimates, and inspection services for public improvements
undertaken by the City; and perform such other duties as required by City
Charter or ordinance.
(Ord. 19-289.  Passed 12-10-19.)
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 143
Department of Utilities
 
Repealed by Ord. 00-456, passed December 19, 2000
CHAPTER 145
Municipal Contracts
 
145.01   Competitive contracts.
145.02   Noncompetitive contracts.
145.03   Bid exceeding estimate.
145.04   Award of contract.
145.05   Approval of contracts.
145.06   Expenditures exceeding Charter limitations.
145.07   Centralized purchasing.
145.08   Unlawful discrimination.
145.09   Certification of contracts.
145.10   Bid protests.
145.11   Contracts to provide laboratory services.
145.12   Selection of professional design firms.
145.13   Noncompetitive design contracts.
145.14   Purchasing contracts during an emergency.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Contracts - see CHTR.
Sec. 42 et seq.
General disqualification - see CHTR.
Sec. 86
Disadvantaged and minority business enterprises - see ADM. Ch.
153
Contract interest - see GEN. OFF.
525.08
 
145.01  COMPETITIVE CONTRACTS.
   Except as provided in Section
145.02, the City shall not enter into a contract for any project, improvement
or purchase, other than the purchase of real property, without notice of the
opportunity to bid on such project, improvement or purchase first being given
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the City for not
less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
145.02  NONCOMPETITIVE CONTRACTS.
   The competitive bidding requirement of Section 
145.01 shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   The estimated cost for the entire project, improvement or purchase is
less than the project cost requiring formal bids pursuant to
Section 45 of the City's Charter; or
      (Ord. 91-294.  Passed 7-23-91.)
   (b)   The contract entered into involves the performance of personal
services of a specialized nature requiring the exercise of peculiar skill and
aptitude; or
   (c)   A real and present emergency exists as determined by a two-thirds vote
of the members of the City Commission which requires a waiver of the bidding
requirements; or
   (d)   The requirements for competitive bidding are waived by the Ohio
Revised Code.
      (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
145.03  BID EXCEEDING ESTIMATE.
   The City shall not enter into a contract for which the preparation of a cost
estimate is required with any person whose bid is in excess of one hundred ten
percent (110%) of such estimate; however, if bids are taken for a contract
which requires the preparation of a cost estimate and which is divisible into
separate parts, then the City may enter into a contract for any such part with
a person whose bid does not exceed one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
estimated cost for such part.
(Ord. 91-294.  Passed 7-23-91.)
 
145.04  AWARD OF CONTRACT.
   The City shall not enter into any contract for which competitive bidding is
required with any person other than the lowest and best bidder.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
145.05  APPROVAL OF CONTRACTS.
   The Director of Law or an attorney authorized by the Director of Law shall
approve every contract entered into by the City as to its legal form and
correctness.  However, the Director of Law or an attorney authorized by the
Director of Law may approve the legal form and correctness of preprinted and
other standardized contracts prior to their completion and execution by the
City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
145.06  EXPENDITURES EXCEEDING CHARTER LIMITATIONS.
   The City shall not enter into any contract involving an expenditure in
excess of the threshold dollar amount requiring legislative authorization
established in Section 735.05 of the Ohio Revised Code, as presently enacted
and as it may be amended from time to time by the General Assembly, with any
person unless such expenditure is authorized by ordinance and such contract is
approved by the City Commission and the City Manager.  This section shall not
apply to expenditures for the compensation of persons employed by the City.
(Ord. 91-294.  Passed 7-23-91.)
 
145.07  CENTRALIZED PURCHASING.
   No department or division of the City shall obtain any supplies, materials
or equipment without submitting a written requisition for such supplies,
materials or equipment to the City's Purchasing Agent.  The Director of
Finance, with the approval of the City Manager, shall prescribe the form and
manner with which such purchase requisitions are submitted to the Purchasing
Agent.  No officer or employee of the City shall expend any funds or enter
into, execute or deliver on behalf of the City any purchase order, contract or
other obligation upon the City, either oral or written, without the advance
written approval of the Purchasing Agent; provided, however, that the City
Manager, or the Director of Finance in the City Manager's absence, may dispense
with such procedure if a real and actual emergency exists in connection with
the  proposed purchase.  Provided further, however, that this section shall not
apply to purchases or contracts directly authorized by the City Commission by
appropriate legislation nor remove the duty of the City Manager to approve
vouchers for the payment of funds from the City Treasury.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
145.08  UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION.
   Every contract, for or on behalf of the City, for the purchase by the City
of any goods or services, is subject to the following provisions:
   (a)   In the hiring of employees for the manufacture, processing or
furnishing of such goods or services, the seller and any person or corporation
acting on his behalf, shall not, by reason of race, religion, color, ancestry,
national origin, sex, or sexual orientation discriminate against any person who
is qualified to perform the work required by such employment.
   (b)   The seller and any person or corporation acting on his behalf, shall
not, on account of race, religion, color, ancestry, national origin, sex, or
sexual orientation in any manner intimidate any employee hired for the
performance of work in connection with the manufacture, processing or
furnishing of any such goods or service.
   (c)   Any seller who violates this section is subject to the following
forfeitures:
      (1)   The deduction of one hundred dollars ($100.00) from the amount
payable to the seller by the City under such contract for each person who is
discriminated against or intimidated in violation of this section;
      (2)   The cancellation or termination by the City of the seller's
contract with the City and the forfeiture of all money due thereunder for a
second or subsequent violation of this section.
   (d)   Contracts with the City shall contain a warning that the above
described unlawful acts shall subject the seller to the forfeitures set forth
in this section.
      (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88; Ord. 18-24.  Passed 1-30-18.)
 
145.09  CERTIFICATION OF CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the City Charter, the City shall not
make any contract or give any order involving the expenditure of money unless
there is attached thereto a certificate of the Finance Director that the amount
required to meet the obligation or, in case of a continuing contract to be
performed in whole or in part in an ensuing calendar year, the amount required
to meet the obligation in the calendar year in which the contract is made, has
been lawfully appropriated for such purpose and is in the treasury or in the
process of collection to the credit of an appropriate fund free from any
previous encumbrances. This certificate need be signed only by the Finance
Director. Every such contract made without such a certificate shall be void,
and no warrant shall be issued in payment of any amount due thereon.  If no
certificate is furnished as required, upon receipt by the City Commission of a
certificate of the Finance Director stating that there was at the time of the
making of such contract or order and at the time of the execution of such
certificate a sufficient sum appropriated for the purpose of such contract in
the treasury or in the process of collection to the credit of an appropriate
fund free from any previous encumbrances, the City Commission may authorize the
drawing of a warrant in the payment of amounts due upon such contract;
provided, that if the amount involved is less then $100.00, the Finance
Director may authorize it to be paid without such affirmation of the City
Commission, if such expenditure is otherwise valid.
 
   (b)   Upon certification by the Finance Director that a certain sum of
money, not in excess of the limit established in
Section 42 of the City's Charter, has been lawfully appropriated, authorized,
or directed for a certain purpose and is in the treasury or in the process of
collection to the credit of a specific line-item appropriation account in a
certain fund free from previous and then outstanding obligations or
certifications, then for such purpose and from such line-item appropriation
account in such fund, over a period not exceeding twelve (12) months and not
extending beyond the thirty-first (31st) day of the January immediately
following the end of the fiscal year in which the certification is made,
expenditures may be made, orders for payments issued, and contracts or
obligations calling for or requiring the payment of money made and assumed;
provided, that the aggregate sum of money included in and called for by such
expenditures, orders, contracts, and obligations shall not exceed the sum so
certified.  Such certification need be signed only by the Finance Director, but
need not be limited to a specific vendor.  An itemized statement of obligations
incurred and expenditures made under such certificate shall be rendered to the
Finance Director before another such certificate may be issued, and not more
than one such certificate shall be outstanding at a time.
 
   (c)   In any case in which a contract is entered into upon a per unit basis,
the head of the department, for which the contract is made, shall make an
estimate of the total amount to become due upon such contract, which estimate
shall be certified in writing to the Finance Director.  Such contract may be
entered into if the appropriation covers such estimate, or so much thereof as
may be due during the current calendar year.  In such a case, the certificate
of the Finance Director based upon the estimate shall be in sufficient
compliance with the law requiring a certificate.
 
   (d)   Any certificate of the Finance Director attached to a contract shall
be binding upon the City as to the facts set forth therein.  Upon request of
any person receiving an order or entering into a contract with the City, the
certificate of the Finance Director shall be attached to such order or
contract.  "Contract" as used in this section excludes obligations for the
compensation of persons employed by the City.
 
   (e)   Taxes and other revenue in process of collection or the proceeds to be
derived from authorized bonds, notes, or certificates of indebtedness sold and
in process of delivery, shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed in
the treasury or in process of collection and in the appropriate fund.  This
section applies neither to the investment of sinking funds by the trustees of
such funds, nor to investments made under sections 731.56 to 731.59 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
(Ord. 91-433.  Passed 11-5-91.)
 
145.10  BID PROTESTS.
   (a)  Bidders whose bids are refused or rejected by the Purchasing Agent and
bidders who object to the Purchasing Agent's recommendation of a contract award
who desire reconsideration of the Purchasing Agent's acts must submit a written
request for reconsideration to the City's Finance Director stating all reasons
the bidder objects to the Purchasing Agent's decision.
 
   (b)   All requests for reconsideration must be submitted within five (5)
days after the Purchasing Agent has posted notice of his recommendation for
award.  Bidders who fail to submit a petition for reconsideration within the
said five (5) day period, waive any objection to the decisions of the
Purchasing Agent.
(Ord. 94-203.  Passed 5-31-94.)
 
145.11  CONTRACTS TO PROVIDE LABORATORY SERVICES.
   The City Manager is authorized to enter into contracts on behalf of the City
to provide laboratory services to public and private entities; provided, that
such contracts may be terminated by the City upon thirty-days notice.  The
contracts shall provide for fees to be paid to the City which shall be set by
the City Manager to recover the costs to the City of providing such services. 
Laboratory services shall be provided only to the extent that the City's
Utilities Department has excess capacity to perform laboratory services over
and above the services needed for City operations.  The City Manager may
delegate the authority to execute laboratory service contracts to the City's
Utilities Director.
(Ord. 94-302.  Passed 8-9-94.)
 
145.12  SELECTION OF PROFESSIONAL DESIGN FIRMS.
   The following procedure shall be used by the City Purchasing Division to
select professional design firms when the expenditure to obtain such services
will require authorization by the City Commission as required by Section
145.06 of this Chapter.  The term "professional design services" means services
within the scope of practice of an architect or
landscape architect registered under Chapter 4703 of the Ohio Revised Code or a
professional engineer or surveyor registered under Chapter 4733 of the Ohio
Revised Code and the term "professional design firm" means any person legally
engaged in rendering professional design services.
   (a)   The City will publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City requesting proposals from professional design firms to provide
professional design services for a project.  The notice will appear at least
once per week for no less than two weeks.  In addition to the notice published
in a newspaper, the City may, but is not required to, publish a 1notice in
other print or electronic media.
   (b)   The notice shall contain a Proposal due date established by the
Purchasing Division which shall be no less than four weeks after the first
newspaper publication date of the notice; however, the Finance Director may
establish a due date less than four weeks after the first newspaper publication
if the Finance Director finds that an emergency exists to preserve the public
health, safety, property or welfare necessitating the establishment of a due
date less than four weeks after the first newspaper publication.
   (c)   The Purchasing Division shall prepare a Request for Proposals which
shall include a general description of the project, a statement of the
professional design services required and the evaluation criteria to be applied
by the City which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The training, licensing and expertise relevant to the proposed work
of the proposer's personnel,
      (2)   The proposer's overall staffing,
      (3)   The proposer's proposed project team,
      (4)   The proposer's related experience on similar projects,
      (5)   The proposer's demonstrated ability to work with federal, state,
and local governments applicable to the project,
      (6)   Client references,
      (7)   Knowledge of the proposer's ability to perform the work in a timely
and efficient manner,
      (8)   Travel time from the proposer's project office to City's project
site,
      (9)   The proposer's understanding of the project,
      (10)   Proposer's explanation of how the City's needs and concerns will
be addressed, including a project timetable, and
      (11)   Cost and fee information.
   (d)   The Request for Proposals will be sent by the Finance Department to
all professional design firms requesting a Request for Proposals as well as to
a sufficient number, as determined by the Finance Director in his/her
discretion, of professional design firms to provide the City with adequate
competition. 
   (e)   The Purchasing Division will review all Proposals submitted to the
City on or before the proposal due date and shall reject any Proposal which
does not substantially conform to the requirements of the Request for
Proposals, including the requirement that cost and fee information be submitted
with the Proposal in a separately-sealed envelope.  The Finance Director will
designate an Evaluation Committee.  Proposals received on or before the
proposal due date will be distributed to the Evaluation Committee for
evaluation. 
   (f)   The Evaluation Committee will coordinate with the Community
Development Department, to assure compliance with the Chapters
153 and
155 of the City's Codified Ordinances, and with any other departments or
agencies necessary to assure that all other requirements and regulations are
met. 
   (g)   The Evaluation Committee shall initially evaluate the Proposals based
on technical aspects of the Proposals and professional experience and
qualifications and shall rate and rank the Proposals based upon such
evaluation.  The Evaluation Committee shall have the right to check client
references and other entities which may have knowledge of the proposer's
qualifications to the extent the Evaluation Committee deems it necessary.  If
the contract for professional design services is to be funded by Federal and/or
State funding, the evaluation and selection process will include consideration
of information in the Proposals bearing upon achieving compliance with all
governmental requirements related to such funding in the award and performance
of  the proposed contract for professional design services.  After the initial
evaluation is completed, the Evaluation Committee will next develop a short-
list of proposers based on the initial rating and ranking.  The short list will
be composed of the highest-ranking proposers (i.e. top ranked, next to top
ranked, etc.).  At least two (2) proposers will be included on the short list,
but the Evaluation Committee need not include more than four (4) proposers.
   (h)   After a short list of professional design firms has been selected, the
Evaluation Committee shall:
      (1)   Open and evaluate the cost and fee information submitted by the
short-list proposers,
      (2)   Re-rank the short-list Proposals giving consideration to the cost
and fee information submitted with the Proposal, and,
      (3)   If deemed necessary by the Evaluation Committee to ensure an
accurate understanding of the Proposals, meet with one or more of the short-
list proposers to discuss their Proposals.
   (i)   The Evaluation Committee shall commence simultaneous negotiations with
one or more of the short-list proposers, including the highest ranked short-
list proposer (based on professional qualifications, technical merit and cost
and fee information).  Negotiations may include developing a final written
description of the scope of the proposed project contract as well as acceptable
costs and fees, if different than the original proposal.  In the event none of 
the short-list proposers are able to agree with the Evaluation Committee on the
terms of a contract after the initial round of negotiations, the Evaluation
Committee may then proceed to recommence negotiations with any one or more of
the short-list proposers even though negotiations with that short-list proposer
had been terminated earlier in the initial round of negotiations.
   (j)   The Evaluation Committee will review its recommended contract award 
with the City Manager (or his/her designee) for the City Manager's concurrence
in the Evaluation Committee's recommended contract award.  Section
145.10 of this Chapter is applicable to this professional design services
procurement process.  The Purchasing Agent shall give the notice of the
proposed contract award recommendation pursuant to Section
145.10 upon obtaining the City Manager's concurrence in recommendation of a
contract award. 
   (k)   If approval by a Federal or State agency is required prior to
consideration of the proposed contract award by the City Commission, the City
staff's recommendation for the contract award will be forwarded to the
appropriate agency or agencies for approval.
   (l)   Upon receiving all required agency approval(s), the Purchasing Agent
will prepare a Request for Commission Action requesting an award of contract by
the City Commission.
   (m)   If the City Commission awards the recommended contract , the
Purchasing Agent shall give written notice of such award to the unsuccessful
proposers.  If the recommended contract is not awarded, the Evaluation
Committee will proceed as directed by City Commission.
      (Ord. 96-147.  Passed 4-30-96.)
 
145.13  NONCOMPETITIVE DESIGN CONTRACTS.
   The contractor selection requirement of Section
145.12 shall not apply and the City Commission may award a contract for
professional design services without any competitive selection process in the
following circumstances:
   (a)   The estimated cost for the design professional services is less than
the project cost requiring formal bids pursuant to
Section 45 of the City's Charter; or
   (b)   The City Commission finds that that the time required to perform the
process described in Section
145.12 will jeopardize the feasibility of a project and selection of a design
professional must be expedited to enable the project to be feasible and to
promote the public welfare; or
   (c)   A real and present emergency exists as determined by a two-thirds vote
of the members of the City Commission which requires a waiver of the
competitive design professional selection process; or
   (d)   The requirements for competitive contractor selection are waived by
the Ohio Revised Code.
      (Ord. 02-318.  Passed 8-6-02.)
 
145.14  PURCHASING CONTRACTS DURING AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   In the event the Mayor determines and declares that the City is in a
time of public danger or emergency, as provided for in
Section 7 of the City’s Charter, during such time of public danger or
emergency, a real and present emergency is deemed to exist and no vote of the
City Commission will be required to find a real and present emergency, as
provided for in Section
145.02 of the Codified Ordinances, and the Mayor, the City Manager, and the
Finance Director are each authorized to and may bind the City to contracts
without complying with competitive bidding requirements and without obtaining
additional legislative approval and authorization by the City Commission for
the expenditures related to such contracts.
 
   (b)   In the event the Mayor determines and declares that the City is in a
time of public danger or emergency, as provided for in
Section 7 of the City’s Charter, during such time of public danger or
emergency, each City Department Director is authorized to approve purchases of
necessary equipment, supplies, and services needed to respond to the exigencies
of the time of public danger or emergency, up to a maximum aggregate sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of purchases which have not been authorized by
the Mayor, City Manager, or Finance Director.
(Ord. 06-382.  Passed 10-17-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 147
Municipal Finances
 
147.01   Record of accounts.
147.02   Issuance of warrants.
147.03   Approval of obligations.
147.04   Collections.
147.05   Moneys and securities.
147.06   Treasury Investment Board.
147.07   City investment policy.
147.08   Vending machine deposits.
147.09   Earned interest.
147.10   Funds considered appropriated.
147.11   Agency funds established.
147.12   General grants and loans.
147.13   Claims.
147.14   Bad debt.
147.15   Charge for bad checks.
147.16   Utility funds.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Finances generally - see CHTR.
Sec. 32 et seq.
 
147.01  RECORD OF ACCOUNTS.
   The Director of Finance shall keep an accurate account of all taxes and
assessments, of all money due to, and all receipts and disbursements by, the
Municipality, of all its assets and liabilities, and of all appropriations made
by the City Commission.  The Director of Finance shall audit the accounts of
the Municipal departments and officers and shall audit all other accounts in
which the City is interested.  The Director of Finance may prescribe the form
of reports submitted to the Department of Finance and the method of keeping
accounts by all other departments.  All departments of the City and all boards
and agencies responsible to the City shall provide the Director of Finance with
a daily account of all Municipal moneys received by such department, board or
agency.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.02  ISSUANCE OF WARRANTS.
   The Director of Finance shall issue all warrants for the payment of money by
the City.  The City Treasurer shall not disburse any money except upon a
warrant issued by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.03  APPROVAL OF OBLIGATIONS.
   The Director of Finance shall examine and approve all contracts, orders and
other documents by which the City incurs financial obligations and shall
ascertain that moneys are appropriated for such purpose.  The Director of
Finance shall audit and approve the payment of all bills, invoices, payrolls
and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the City and with the
advice of the Director of Law shall determine the regularity, legality and
correctness of such claims, demands or charges.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.04  COLLECTIONS.
   The Director of Finance shall collect all fees and other obligations owed to
the City and promptly transmit them to the City Treasurer for deposit. 
However, the Director of Finance may, with the concurrence of the City Manager,
permit other departments to collect fees and other obligations due to the City
and payable through such departments and to promptly transmit them to the City
Treasurer for deposit.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.05  MONEYS AND SECURITIES.
   The City Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys and securities of the
City and shall keep them in a safe place and manner as required by law.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.06  TREASURY INVESTMENT BOARD.
   The City Manager, the Director of Finance and the Director of Law shall
constitute the Treasury Investment Board as provided in Ohio R.C. 731.57.  The
Director of Finance shall maintain an account to be known as the Treasury
Investment Account, in which the Director of Finance shall enter all
transactions relating to the investment of Treasury funds, as is provided in
Ohio R.C. 731.56 and 731.57.  The Director of Finance shall furnish the City
Treasurer such information as is required by Ohio R.C. 731.58.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.07  CITY INVESTMENT POLICY.
   Neither the City nor the Treasury Investment Board is required to comply
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 135 so long as there is a City investment policy adopted
by the City Commission effective for the City.  The Director of Finance, the
Treasurer and their respective bondsmen or surety are relieved from any
liability for the loss of any public moneys invested by them; provided, the
investment of the public money is done in compliance with an effective City
investment policy adopted by the City Commission.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.08  VENDING MACHINE DEPOSITS.
   The Director of Finance shall deposit all proceeds from vending machines
situated on City property received since January 1, 2013, into the General
Fund.
(Ord. 00-456, Passed 12-19-00; Ord. 13-149, Passed 6-11-13.)
 
147.09  EARNED INTEREST.
   The Director of Finance may credit the interest earned on moneys received
for and on behalf of the City to the General Fund of the City; provided,
however, that the Director of Finance shall credit interest earned on moneys
derived from trusts or other instruments in accordance with such trusts or
other instruments.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.10  FUNDS CONSIDERED APPROPRIATED.
   The following funds are considered appropriated:
   (a)   Money borrowed as provided in Ohio R.C. 133.20.
   (b)   The proceeds of a bond issue duly authorized as provided in Ohio R.C.
5705.41.
   (c)   Grants or loans of money to the City from the U.S. government as
provided in Ohio R.C. 5705.42. 
      (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
   (d)   Money derived from an annual levy of the Board of Directors of the
Conservancy District which has determined, ordered and levied same as provided
in Ohio R.C. 6101.61. 
      (Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.11  AGENCY FUNDS ESTABLISHED.
   The Director of Finance is authorized to establish agency funds to account
for assets held by the City as an agent for individuals, private organizations,
other political subdivisions and other third party funds held by the City. 
Agency funds, being of a custodial nature, are recognized by Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP) as being exempt from the City's formal budgetary
accounting requirements and, therefore, do not require appropriation by the
City Commission.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.12  GENERAL GRANTS AND LOANS.
   The City Manager is the authorized representative of the City in all matters
concerning the execution, submission and processing of all applications for
loans or grants from any State or federal department, agency or authority.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.13  CLAIMS.
   The Director of Law shall not settle any claim unless an appropriation is
available for such claim.  The Director of Finance may issue a warrant for
payment of a claim settled by the Director of Law.  The Director of Law shall
submit a voucher to the Director of Finance requesting payment for such claim.
 
   The Director of Law shall not settle any claim against the City based on a
contract made or purportedly made with the City or any claim in an amount in
excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) without first obtaining specific
authorization to settle such claim from the City Commission.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
147.14  BAD DEBT.
   The Director of Finance, with the concurrence of the City Manager and also
of the Director of Law or Deputy Law Director, may determine that a financial
obligation owed to the City is uncollectable and may delete such obligation
from the City's current accounts.  In determining that an obligation is
uncollectable, the Director of Finance shall adhere to the Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP) for governmental entities and other applicable
legal and accounting requirements.
(Ord. 06-11.  Passed 1-17-06.)
 
147.15  CHARGE FOR BAD CHECKS.
   There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each check,
draft, money order or the like, which is made payable to the City as payment
for any tax, fee, charge, license or renewal thereof, permit or renewal
thereof, assessment, rent, sale of City property or Municipal Court
restitution, which is properly refused for payment to the City.  Such twenty-
five dollar ($25.00) charge shall be levied and collected against the maker or
drawer of such check, draft, money order or the like.
(Ord. 92-308.  Passed 10-13-92.)
 
147.16  UTILITY FUNDS.
   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to apply moneys collected from or
on behalf of owners, as that term is defined in Chapters
911 and
917 of the City's Codified Ordinances, first to charges levied pursuant to
Chapter
911 and finally to charges levied pursuant to Chapter
917.  When such utility charges are not paid when due, the Director of Finance
may pursue collection of such utility charges pursuant to the procedure
described in Ohio R.C. 743.04(A).
(Ord. 88-91.  Passed 2-23-88.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 149
Municipal Property
 
149.01   Acquisition of real property.
149.02   Disposal of real property.
149.03   Disposal of personal property.
149.04   Donations.
149.05   Lease of City property.
149.06   Water utility rental.
149.07   Water utility rental payment.
149.08   Plumbing materials at municipal golf courses.
149.09   Records submitted to the City; trade secrets.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Procedure for sale or lease of real property - see ADM.
111.02
Sale or lease of property - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 721
 
149.01  ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
   The City may acquire real property by private or public sale, gift, devise,
lease, dedication, eminent domain or any other lawful means as needed for
Municipal purposes.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
149.02  DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY.
   The City may convey real property owned by the City and which is not needed
for Municipal purposes by private or public sale and with or without
competitive bidding.  The City may dispose of such real property only upon
authorization and direction by ordinance of the City Commission.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
149.03  DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   The City may dispose of personal property owned by the City and no
longer needed for municipal purposes by private or public sale and with or
without competitive bidding.
 
   (b)   Personal property of the City not needed for municipal purposes, as
determined by the City Manager, and having an estimated value not exceeding
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), may be sold or traded by the City Manager. 
The record of such sale or disposal shall be recorded in the City Manager's
journal.  All other personal property not needed for Municipal purposes may be
sold or traded only upon authorization and direction by ordinance of the City
Commission.
(Ord. 02-328.  Passed 8-20-02.)
 
   (c)    Personal property of the City not needed for municipal purposes and
which has no value, as determined by the City Manager, may be offered at no
charge to non-profit organizations serving the Springfield community on a
first-come-first-served basis prior to such unneeded property being sent to a
landfill or otherwise discarded.
(Ord. 00-194.  Passed 5-16-00.)
 
149.04  DONATIONS.
   Property, both real and personal, and services donated, devised, dedicated
or otherwise given to the City without cost, excepting recording fees, may be
accepted by the City Manager on behalf of the City, provided the value of the
property or services does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), the
estimated expenditures by the City related to the property or services for a
period of twelve  months  will  not exceed  one thousand dollars  ($1,000)  and
the  City Manager  finds  that  acceptance of the property or services is in
the best interest of the City.  A record of property and services accepted by
the City Manager shall be recorded in the City Manager's journal.  All other
property, both real and personal, and services donated, devised, dedicated or
otherwise given to the City may be accepted by the City only by ordinance of
the City Commission, which ordinance shall contain a finding by the City
Commission that acceptance of the property or services is in the best interest
of the City.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
149.05  LEASE OF CITY PROPERTY.
   (a)  The City Manager is authorized to enter into lease agreements and
license agreements to lease or issue a license for the use of the Municipal
Swimming Pool, Municipal Stadium, public recreation areas owned by the City,
Core Block Plaza, the Esplanade, and City-owned lands when exclusive occupancy
by the City is not currently necessary to provide City services; when the lease
or license is cancelable upon no more than thirty days advance notice.  The
City Manager is authorized to execute any and all documents necessary to
fulfill the City's obligations under the agreements described in this section.
(Ord. 99-290.  Passed 9-7-99.)
 
   (b)  The City Manager is authorized to grant, on behalf of the City,
licenses to public utilities to use City property, including public
thoroughfare right-of-way; provided, that such licenses may be revoked at any
time and the Service Director or designee has made a determination that
granting such license will not result in creating a nuisance within a public
thoroughfare.  The City Manager may impose such obligations and limitations
upon a licensee as are necessary to prevent safety hazards, protect public
property and ensure the licensee's compliance with law.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
   (c)   The City Manager is authorized to grant and enter into, on behalf of
the City, conduit lease and service agreements allowing the occupancy of space
in City-owned conduit which the City Manager determines is not needed for
municipal purposes.  The City Manager is further authorized to establish fee
structures for allowing the occupancy of space in City-owned conduit. The
conduit lease and service agreements shall provide that the City shall have the
right to terminate the lease and service agreement upon six (6) months written
notice to the lessee if the leased space is needed in connection with the
City’s municipal purposes of a higher priority, as determined by the City
Commission.  At the time of such notice of termination, the City shall waive
(or return to the lessee as the case may be) any unused portion of the payment
made under the lease and service agreement that the City elects to terminate. 
In addition, the City shall have the right to terminate the lease and service
agreement upon thirty (30) days written notice to the lessee if the lease and
service agreement creates an adverse impact upon the public health, safety, and
welfare or the City's fiscal standing as an Ohio municipal corporation.
(Ord. 09-328. Passed 12-8-09.)
 
149.06  WATER UTILITY RENTAL.
   Unless otherwise provided by the City Commission, and so long as the Water
Fund utilizes and derives the benefit of the City Hall garage space and the
light, heat, janitorial, maintenance and other facilities and services incident
thereto, the Water Fund shall pay from revenue derived by it from its
operations; namely, water rental assessments, to the Municipal government, for
credit to the General Fund thereof, an annual rental, in the amount of thirteen
thousand six hundred dollars ($13,600), payable in quarterly installments of
three thousand four hundred dollars ($3,400) each, at the end of each three
months.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
149.07  WATER UTILITY RENTAL PAYMENT.
   The Director of the Department of Utility Services shall issue a voucher
approved by the City Manager and drawn against the Water Works Fund of the City
to pay the quarterly amount due of the annual rental required by Section
149.06.  Upon receipt of such voucher, the Director of Finance shall issue a
warrant against the Water Works Fund and in favor of the General Fund of the
City in the amount of the voucher.
(Ord. 88-319.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
149.08  PLUMBING MATERIALS AT MUNICIPAL GOLF FACILITIES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
1361.02(b) of the Codified Ordinances, the City may use polyvinyl chloride
(PVC), chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), reinforced thermal-setting resin
pipe (RTRP), polybutylene (PV), polyethylene (PE), and other plastic pipings or
fittings permitted by the Ohio Plumbing Code in the construction of plumbing on
golf facilities owned and operated by the City.
(Ord. 94-201.  Passed 5-24-94.)
 
149.09  RECORDS SUBMITTED TO THE CITY; TRADE SECRETS.
   (a)   All records submitted to the City in performance of a contract with
the City, as part of an application made to the City, as part of a bid or
proposal made to the City, as part of an information submittal made to the City
in compliance with licensing requirements of the City, or as part of a request
or petition seeking any form of action by the City shall be the property of the
City.  All such records shall have the status of a public record available for
inspection and copying by the public pursuant to Section 149.43 of the Ohio
Revised Code, unless:
      (1)   The submitter of the record identifies the specific record or
portion of the record as a trade secret by clearly and conspicuously labeling
the record or portion of the record with the legend "TRADE SECRET", or
      (2)   The submitter of the record identifies the specific record or
portion of the record as material the release of which is prohibited by state
or federal law by clearly and conspicuously labeling the record or portion of
the record with the legend "NOT TO BE RELEASED TO THE PUBLIC" and with a
citation to the statute or other law prohibiting release of the record or
portion thereof.
 
   (b)   The term "record" means all written or graphic matter, data processing
media, sound recordings, and all other written or electronic mediums by which
information is stored, however produced or reproduced and of every kind and
description.
 
   (c)   The term "trade secret" means information, including the whole or any
portion or phase of any scientific or technical information, design, process,
procedure, formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique,
or improvement, or any business information or plans, financial information, or
listing of names, addresses, or telephone numbers, that satisfies both of the
following:
      (1)   It derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from
not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper
means by, other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or
use.
      (2)   It is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the
circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
      (Ord. 03-382.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 151
Issue and Sale of Bonds and Notes
 
151.01   Compliance with law required
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Uniform Public Securities Law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 133
 
151.01  COMPLIANCE WITH LAW REQUIRED.
   All bonds and notes of the City, hereafter issued or sold, and all
proceedings relating to the issue or sale thereof, shall conform to the general
laws of Ohio, particularly the Uniform Public Securities Law of the Ohio
Revised Code, and other applicable acts of the General Assembly; and, to the
extent that the same are not inconsistent therewith, to the provisions of the
City Charter, the particular ordinance or resolution authorizing the issue or
sale of any specific bonds or notes.
(Ord. 88-319, passed 5-31-88; Ord. 13-164, passed 6-25-13.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 153
Disadvantaged and Minority Business Enterprises
 
153.01   Policy statement and objectives.
153.02   Definitions of terms.
153.03   Duties of the MBE Officer.
153.04   MBE eligibility and certification.
153.05   DBE eligibility and certification.
153.06   Required steps in evaluating MBE and DDE.
153.06   applications.
153.07   Contracting goals.
153.08   Counting MBE participation.
153.09   Counting DBE participation.
153.10   Waiver of bond.
153.11   Nondiscrimination by contractors.
153.12   Time requirements and procedure for noncompliance.
153.13   Third party complaints.
153.14   Reciprocal certification.
153.99   Penalty.
 
153.01  POLICY STATEMENT AND OBJECTIVES.
   (a)   It is the policy of the City of Springfield, Ohio, that Disadvantaged
Business Enterprises and Minority Business Enterprises, as defined in Section
153.02, shall have the maximum practical opportunity to participate in the
performance of contracts let by the City.  In this regard, the City and its
contractors are required to comply with both the letter and spirit of this
chapter, as well as with the authority as defined by United States Department
of Transportation, 49 CFR Part 23, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
Executive Order 11625, October 13, 1971, Executive Order 11246, and other laws
applicable to providing contracting opportunities to Disadvantaged Business
Enterprises and Minority Business Enterprises.
 
   (b)   The objectives which the City establishes for the Disadvantaged and
Minority Business Enterprises Program are:
      (1)   To ensure that Disadvantaged Business Enterprises and Minority
Business Enterprises have maximum opportunity to participate in all City
contracts;
      (2)   To encourage all City contractors to make conscientious efforts,
consistent with sound procurement practices and applicable law, to afford
Disadvantaged Business Enterprises and Minority Business Enterprises a fair
opportunity in their subcontracting or supplying processes;
      (3)   To prohibit City contractors from discriminating against potential
subcontractors and potential suppliers because such potential subcontractor or
potential supplier is a minority or a disadvantaged business.
         (Ord. 94-106.  Passed 4-5-94.)
 
   (c)   Private corporations, firms, or persons receiving tax abatement or tax
credit development incentives from the City shall award their construction and
purchase contracts consistent with the objectives set forth in this section.
(Ord. 94-106.  Passed 4-5-94.)
 
153.02  DEFINITIONS OF TERMS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall be
defined as set forth as follows:
   (a)   "Asian-Indian Americans" includes persons whose origins are from
India, Pakistan, Sri-Lanka and Bangladesh.
   (b)   "Asian-Pacific Americans" includes persons whose origins are from
Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietman, Laos, Cambodia, the Philippines, Samoa,
Guam, the U.S. Trust Territories of the Pacific, and the Northern Marianas.
   (c)   "Bid" or "bidder" also includes the terms "proposal" and "proposer".
   (d)   "Black Americans" includes persons having origins in any of the black
racial groups of Africa.
   (e)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (f)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Springfield,
Ohio.
   (g)   "Contract" means a binding agreement executed on or after the
effective date of this chapter whereby the City is committed to expend or does
expend its funds or other resources for or in connection with the following
purposes:
      (1)   Construction of any public improvements;
      (2)   Purchase of any personal property;
      (3)   Purchase of any services;
      (4)   Lease of any personal property; or
      (5)   Concession agreements whereby the City grants a specific
permission, privilege or license.
   (h)   "Contractor" means a party who participates, at any level, in a
contract as defined in subsection (g) hereof.
   (i)   "Disadvantaged Business Enterprises" (hereinafter referred to as
"DBE") means a small business concern:
      (1)   Which is at least fifty-one percent (51%) owned by one or more
socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, or, in the case of any
publicly owned business, at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the stock of which
is owned by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals;
and
      (2)   Whose management and daily business operations are controlled by
one or more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own
it.
   (j)   "Discriminate" means to exclude an individual or group solely on the
basis of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, handicap, ancestry
or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status.
   (k)   "Hispanic Americans" includes persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban,
Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin,
regardless of race.
   (l)   "Joint venture" means an association of two or more businesses to
carry out a single business enterprise for profit for which purpose they
combine their property, capital, efforts, skills and knowledge.
   (m)   "Manufacturer" means a firm that operates or maintains a factory or
establishment that produces on the premises the materials or supplies obtained
by the recipient or contractor.
    (n)   "Minority Business Officer" or "MBE Officer" means the person
designated by the City's Director of Community Development to administer this
chapter.  The Minority Business Officer shall also serve as the City's "DBE
Liaison Officer" and shall perform the duties of such office as described in 49
CFR Section 23.45.
   (o)   "Minority" means a United States citizen or lawful, permanent resident
who is:
      (1)   Black American.
      (2)   Hispanic American.
      (3)   Native American.
      (4)   Asian-Pacific American.
      (5)   Asian-Indian American.
   (p)   "Minority Business Enterprise", (hereinafter referred to as "MBE")
means a business concern which is at least fifty-one percent (51%) owned by one
or more minorities or females, or in the case of a publicly-owned business, at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of the stock is owned by minorities or females;
whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more
such minority or female individuals; and that at least fifty-one percent (51%)
of the net profits or losses attributable to that business enterprise accrues
to minority or female persons.
   (q)   "Native Americans" includes persons who are American Indians, Eskimos,
Aleuts, or Native Hawaiians.
   (r)   "Regular dealer" means a firm that owns, operates or maintains a
store, warehouse or other establishment in which the materials or supplies
required for the performance of the contract are bought, kept in stock and
regularly sold to the public in the usual course of business.  To be a regular
dealer, the firm must engage in, as its principal business, and in its own
name, the purchase and sale of the products in question.  A regular dealer in
such bulk items as steel, cement, gravel, stone and petroleum products need not
keep such products in stock, if it owns or operates distribution equipment. 
Brokers and packagers shall not be regarded as manufacturers or regular dealers
within the meaning of this chapter.
   (s)   "Small business concern" means a small business as defined pursuant to
Section 3 of the Small Business Act and relevant regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto except that a small business concern shall not include any
concern or group of concerns controlled by the same socially and economically
disadvantaged individual or individuals which has annual average gross receipts
in excess of $14 million over the previous three fiscal years.
   (t)   "Socially and economically disadvantaged individuals" (hereinafter
referred to as "disadvantaged individuals") means those individuals who are
citizens of the United States or lawfully admitted permanent residents, and who
are women, Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Asian-Pacific
Americans or Asian-Indian Americans and any other minorities or individuals
found to be disadvantaged by the Small Business Administration pursuant to
Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act.
   (u)   "Subcontractor" means one who has contracted with the original
contractor for the performance of all or a part of the work or services which
such original contractor has contracted to perform.  The purchase of materials
and/or equipment by a contractor or a subcontractor for the performing of the
work or services of its contract shall not be defined as subcontracting.
   (v)   "HUD" means the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   (w)   "UMTA" means the United States Urban Mass Transportation
Administration.
   (x)   "DOT" means the United States Department of Transportation.
   (y)   "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.03  DUTIES OF THE MBE OFFICER.
   In addition to those duties specified in other sections of this chapter, the
MBE Officer and such other employees as are necessary shall implement and
enforce this chapter in accordance with the duties listed hereunder.  The
duties of the MBE Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Developing, monitoring implementation of and providing continuing
evaluation of the City's MBE/DBE Program.
   (b)   The MBE Officer shall be responsible for the administration of this
chapter and shall, consistent with the terms and policies of this chapter,
provide such assistance as is necessary and appropriate to help contractors
comply with the provisions of this chapter.  In the event the MBE Officer has
reason to believe that a contractor is not in compliance with this ordinance,
the MBE Officer shall communicate such concerns to the City Manager and obtain
the advice and instructions from the City Manager prior to proceeding with any
corrective actions or actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (Ord. 94-106.  Passed 4-5-94.)
   (c)   Reviewing all submittals and other information supplied and required
by Sections
153.04 and
153.05 of this chapter and other applicable Federal requirements to determine
whether individual contractors have been certified or are certifiable as MBE's
and/or DBE's.
   (d)   Compile and maintain a directory identifying MBE's and DBE's by name,
address and other designations deemed appropriate by the MBE Officer.  Each
such business enterprise shall be classified in the directory as a MBE and/or
DBE.  The directory shall be updated at least annually and shall be made
available in the office of the MBE Officer for review by bidders.
   (e)   Assisting in securing management and technical assistance resources
for MBE's and DBE's.
   (f)   Publicizing business opportunities with the City suitable for MBE or
DBE participation including, but not limited to, those involving the use of
funds provided by HUD, UMTA, DOT and FAA.
   (g)   Assisting MBE's and DBE's in locating resources to aid in bidding on
City contracts and subcontracts by planning and/or participating in training
sessions, workshops, seminars, etc.  This assistance includes pre-bid and pre-
construction meetings to explain MBE/DBE requirements.
   (h)   Monitoring the subcontracting practices of contractors to ensure
continued compliance with this chapter.
   (i)   Receiving and reviewing all rules and regulations issued by the State
of Ohio or the Federal government relevant to contract compliance, and assuring
that the City is conforming to those rules and regulations applicable to the
City.
   (j)   Investigating complaints of discrimination against MBE's and DBE's by
City contractors.
      (Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.04  MBE ELIGIBILITY AND CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   Each business, including the MBE partner in a joint venture, wishing
to participate in City contracts as a MBE shall complete and submit a MBE
application.  Each entity wishing to participate as a joint venture MBE shall
in addition complete and submit a MBE joint venture application.  The
applications shall be signed by the authorized representative of the business
entity and shall be sworn to before a notary public.  A business seeking
certification as an MBE shall submit the required application with its bid.
 
   (b)   The MBE Officer shall apply the following standards in determining
whether a business enterprise qualifies for MBE status:
      (1)   Bona fide minority group membership shall be established on the
basis of the individual's claim that he or she is a member of a minority group
and is so regarded by that particular minority community.
      (2)   An eligible MBE under this part shall be an independent business. 
The ownership and control by minorities shall be real, substantial and
continuing, and shall go beyond the pro forma ownership of the firm as
reflected in its ownership documents.  The minority owners shall enjoy the
customary incidents of ownership and shall share in the risks and profits
commensurate with their ownership interests, as demonstrated by a examination
of the substance rather than form of arrangements.  Recognition of the business
as a separate entity for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily
sufficient for recognition as an MBE.  In determining whether a potential MBE
is an independent business, the MBE Officer shall consider the date the
business was established, the adequacy of its resources for the work of the
contract, and the degree to which financial, equipment leasing and other
relationships with nonminority firms vary from industry practice.
       (3)   The minority owners shall also possess the power to direct or
cause the direction of the management and policies of the firm and to make the
day-to-day as well as major decisions on matters of management, policy and
operations.  The firm shall not be subject to any formal or informal
restrictions which limit the customary discretion of the minority.  There shall
be no restrictions through, for example, bylaw provisions, partnership
agreements or requirements in articles of incorporation for cumulative voting
rights or otherwise that prevent the minority owners, without the cooperation
or vote of any owner who is not a minority, from making a business decision of
the firm.
      (4)   If the owners of the firm who are not minorities are
disp;roportionately responsible for the operation of the firm, then the firm is
not controlled by minorities and shall not be considered an MBE within the
meaning of this chapter.  Where the actual management of the firm is contracted
out to individuals other than the owner, those persons who have the ultimate
power to hire and fire the managers can, for the purpose of this part, be
considered as controlling the business.
      (5)   All securities which constitute ownership and/or control of a
corporation for purposes of establishing it as a MBE under this part shall be
held directly by minorities.  No securities held in trust, or by any guardian
for a minor, shall be considered as held by a minority in determining the
ownership or control of a corporation.
      (6)   The contributions of capital or expertise by the minority owners to
acquire their interests in the firm shall be real and substantial.  Examples of
insufficient contributions include a promise to contribute capital, a note
payable to the firm or its owners who are not minorities, or the mere
participation as an employee, rather than as a manager.
      (7)   Newly formed firms and firms whose ownership and/or control has
changed since the date of the advertisement of the contract shall be reviewed
to determine the reasons for the timing of the formation of or change in the
firm.
      (8)   A previous and/or continuing employer-employee relationship between
or among present owners shall be reviewed to ensure that the employee-owner has
management responsibilities and capabilities discussed in this section.
      (9)   Any relationship between an MBE and a business which is not an MBE
which has an interest in the MBE shall be reviewed to determine if the interest
of the non-MBE conflicts with the ownership and control requirements of this
section.
 
   (c)   A joint venture is eligible under this section if the MBE partner of
the joint venture meets the standards for an eligible MBE set forth above and
the MBE partner is responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work to be
performed and shares in the ownership, control, management responsibilities,
risks and profits of the joint venture.
 
   (d)   A business wishing to be certified as an MBE or joint venture MBE
shall provide such additional information to the City as the MBE Officer shall
request.
 
   (e)   If after reviewing the above data, the MBE Officer determines that the
applying business enterprise is a bona fide MBE, he shall certify the business
enterprise as a MBE firm and issue a MBE certification number to the firm.  The
certification shall be effective as long as the information in the relevant MBE
application continues to be true, but no longer than for a period of twelve
months.
 
   (f)   Once certified, an MBE shall update its MBE application annually.  If
at any time there is a change in ownership or control of the firm, the MBE
shall submit a new MBE application.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.05  DBE ELIGIBILITY AND CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   Each business, including the DBE partner in a joint venture, wishing
to participate as a DBE shall complete and submit a DBE application.  Each
entity wishing to participate as a joint venture DBE shall in addition complete
and submit a DBE joint venture application.  The applications shall be signed
by the authorized representative of the business entity and shall be sworn to
before a notary public.  A business seeking certification as an DBE shall
submit the required application with its bid.
 
   (b)   The MBE Officer shall apply the following standards in determining
whether a business enterprise qualifies for DBE status:
      (1)   Bona fide minority group membership shall be established on the
basis of the individual's claim that he or she is a member of a minority group
and is so regarded by that particular minority community.
      (2)   An eligible DBE under this part shall be an independent business
and shall be a small business concern.  The ownership and control by
disadvantaged individuals shall be real, substantial and continuing, and shall
go beyond the pro forma ownership of the firm as reflected in its ownership
documents.  The disadvantaged individuals shall enjoy the customary incidents
of ownership and shall share in the risks and profits commensurate with their
ownership interests, as demonstrated by an examination of the substance rather
than form of arrangements.  Recognition of the business as a separate entity
for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily sufficient for recognition as
an DBE.  In determining whether a potential DBE is an independent business, the
MBE Officer shall consider the date the business was established, the adequacy
of its resources for the work of the contract, and the degree to which
financial, equipment leasing and other relationships with nondisadvantaged
individual firms vary from industry practice.
      (3)   The disadvantaged individuals who are owners shall also possess the
power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the
firm and to make the day-to-day as well as major decisions on matters of
management, policy and operations.  The firm shall not be subject to any formal
or informal restrictions which limit the customary discretion of the
disadvantaged individual.  There shall be no restrictions through, for example,
bylaw provisions, partnership agreements or requirements of the articles of
incorporation for cumulative voting rights or otherwise that prevent
disadvantaged individuals, without the cooperation or vote of any owner who is
not a disadvantaged individual, from making a business decision of the firm.
      (4)   If the owners of the firm who are not disadvantaged individuals are
disproportionately responsible for the operation of the firm, then the firm is
not controlled by disadvantaged individuals and shall not be considered a DBE
within the meaning of this chapter.  Where the actual management of the firm is
contracted out to individuals other than the owner, those persons who have the
ultimate power to hire and fire the managers can, for the purpose of this part,
be considered as controlling the business.
      (5)   All securities which constitute ownership and/or control of a
corporation for purposes of establishing it as an DBE under this part shall be
held directly by disadvantaged individuals.  No securities held in trust, or by
any guardian for a minor, shall be considered as held by a disadvantaged
individual in determining the ownership or control of a corporation.
      (6)   The contributions of capital or expertise by the disadvantaged
individual owners to acquire their interests in the firm shall be real and
substantial.  Examples of insufficient contributions include a promise to
contribute capital, a note payable to the firm or its owners who are not
socially and economically disadvantaged, or the mere participation as an
employee, rather than as a manager.
      (7)   Newly formed firms and firms whose ownership and/or control has
changed since the date of the advertisement of the contract shall be reviewed
to determine the reasons for the timing of the formation of or change in the
firm.
      (8)   A previous and/or continuing employer-employee relationship between
or among present owners shall be reviewed to ensure that the employee-owner has
management responsibilities and capabilities discussed in this section.
      (9)   Any relationship between an DBE and a business which is not an DBE
which has an interest in the DBE shall be reviewed to determine if the interest
of the non-DBE conflicts with the ownership and control requirements of this
section.
 
   (c)   A joint venture is eligible under this section if the DBE partner of
the joint venture meets the standards for an eligible DBE set forth above and
the DBE partner is responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work to be
performed and shares in the ownership, control, management responsibilities,
risks and profits of the joint venture.
 
   (d)   A business wishing to be certified as an DBE or joint venture DBE
shall provide such additional information to the City as the MBE Officer shall
request.
 
   (e)   If after reviewing the above data, the MBE Officer determines that the
applying business enterprise is a bona fide DBE, he shall certify the business
enterprise as a DBE firm and issue a DBE certification number to the firm.  The
certification shall be effective as long as the information in the relevant DBE
application continues to be true, but no longer than for a period of twelve
months.
 
   (f)   Once certified, a DBE shall update its DBE application annually.  If
at any time there is a change in ownership or control of the firm, the DBE
shall submit a new DBE application.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.06  REQUIRED STEPS IN EVALUATING MBE AND DBE APPLICATIONS.
   The MBE Officer shall take the following steps in evaluating each MBE and
DBE application.  The MBE Officer shall also perform such additional
investigation as the MBE Officer deems necessary to thoroughly and fairly
evaluate each MBE and DBE application.  At a minimum, the MBE Officer shall:
   (a)   Perform an on-site visit to the offices of the applicant firm and to
any job sites on which the applicant firm is working at the time of the
eligibility investigation.
   (b)   Obtain the resumes or work histories of the principal owners of the
applicant firm and personally interview such individuals.
   (c)   Analyze the ownership of stock in the applicant firm, if it is a
corporation.
   (d)   Analyze the bonding and financial capacity of the applicant firm.
   (e)   Determine the work history of the applicant firm, including contracts
it has received and work it has completed.
   (f)   Obtain or compile a list of equipment owned or available to the
applicant firm and the licenses of the firm and its key personnel to perform
the work it seeks to do in participating in the MBE/DBE Program.
   (g)   Obtain a statement from the applicant firm of the type of work it
prefers to perform as part of the MBE/DBE Program.
      (Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.07  CONTRACTING GOALS.
   (a)   The following over all annual goals are established for MBE and DBE
participation in contracts awarded by the City:
      (1)   Eighteen percent (18%) MBE participation in City contracts funded
by HUD.
      (2)   Fourteen percent (14%) DBE participation in City contracts funded
by DOT and FAA.
      (3)   Fourteen percent (14%) DBE participation in City contracts funded
by UMTA.
 
   (b)   The City Manager shall establish an individual contract goal for each
prime contract with subcontracting possibilities which will be funded by HUD,
DOT, FAA or UMTA.  The City Manager shall consider the known availability of
qualified MBE's and DBE's in establishing each individual contract goal.
 
   (c)   Each contractor who is awarded a contract, which will be funded by
HUD, DOT, FAA or UMTA, shall use its best efforts to meet the individual
contract goal established by the City Manager for the contract awarded.
 
   (d)   Contractors shall, at a minimum, seek DBE's and MBE's in the same
geographic area in which they seek subcontractors generally for a given
solicitation.  If the contractor cannot meet the goals using DBE's and MBE's
from this geographic area, the contractor, as part of its efforts to meet the
goal, shall expand its search to a reasonable wider geographic area.
 
   (e)   Bidders submitting a bid for any contract shall disclose to the MBE
Officer, in writing, the names and addresses of each DBE and MBE firm that will
participate in the contract, if awarded to the bidder, a description of the
work each named DBE and MBE will perform, and the dollar amount of
participation in the contract by each named DBE and MBE.  Such discloser shall
be made to the MBE Officer prior to award of the contract by the City
Commission.
 
   (f)   Contractors shall make good faith efforts to replace a MBE
subcontractor that is unable to perform successfully with another MBE and
replace a DBE subcontractor that is unable to perform successfully with another
DBE.
 
   (g)   Requests for bids published by the City in connection with projects
funded by HUD, DOT, FAA and UMTA shall inform competitors of the information
which must be submitted by competitors to demonstrate their ability to comply
with MBE/DBE requirements of the City and shall state that compliance with such
requirements is a precondition of an award of contract.
 
   (h)   The City Manager shall have discretion to decide whether each
contractor has exercised its best efforts to meet the individual contract
goal.  In deciding whether a contractor has exercised its best efforts, the
City Manager shall consider the following:
      (1)   Whether the contractor attended any pre-solicitation or pre-bid
meetings that were scheduled by the recipient to inform DBE's and MBE's of
contracting and subcontracting opportunities.
      (2)   Whether the contractor advertised in general circulation, trade
association, and minority-focus media concerning the subcontracting
opportunities.
      (3)   Whether the contractor provided written notice to a reasonable
number of specific DBE's and MBE's enabling the DBE's or MBE's to participate
effectively.
      (4)   Whether the contractor followed up initial solicitations of
interest by contacting DBE's and MBE's to determine with certainty whether the
DBE's and MBE's were interested.
      (5)   Whether the contractor selected portions of the work to be
performed by DBE's and MBE's in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the
DBE and MBE goals (including, where appropriate, breaking down contracts into
economically feasible units to facilitate DBE and MBE participation).
      (6)   Whether the contractor provided interested DBE's and MBE's with
adequate information about the plans, specifications and requirements of the
contract.
      (7)   Whether the contractor negotiated in good faith with interested
DBE's and MBE's, not rejecting DBE's and MBE's as unqualified without sound
reasons based on a thorough investigation of their capabilities.
      (8)   Whether the contractor made efforts to assist interested DBE's and
MBE's in obtaining bonding, lines of credit or insurance required by the City
and contractor.
      (9)   Whether the contractor effectively used the services of available
minority community organizations; minority contractors' groups; local, State
and Federal minority business assistance offices; and other organizations that
provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of DBE's and MBE's.
      (10)   Whether the contractor has provided documents and information
which the MBE Officer has required the contractor to provide to the City.
 
   (i)   If the City Manager decides that a contract awardee has not exercised
good faith to meet the contractor's individual contract goal, the City Manager
shall recommend to the City Commission that the award of contract to such
contractor be revoked.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.08  COUNTING MBE PARTICIPATION.
   MBE participation shall be counted toward meeting MBE goals set in
accordance with this chapter as follows:
   (a)   Once a firm is determined to be an eligible MBE in accordance with
this chapter, the total dollar value of the contract awarded to the MBE is
counted toward the applicable MBE goals.
   (b)   The total dollars value of a contract to an MBE owned and controlled
by minorities is counted toward the goals for minorities in proportion to the
percentage of ownership and control of each group in the business.
   (c)   A contractor may count toward its MBE goals a portion of the total
dollar value of a contract with a joint venture eligible under the standards of
this chapter equal to the percentage of the ownership and controls of the MBE
partner in the joint venture.
   (d)   (1)   A contractor may count toward its MBE goals only expenditures to
MBEs that perform a commercially useful function in the work of a contract.  An
MBE is considered to perform a commercially useful function when it is
responsible for execution of a distinct element of the work of a contract and
carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and
supervising the work involved.  To determine whether an MBE is performing a
commercially useful function, the MBE Officer shall evaluate the amount of work
subcontracted, industry practices and other relevant factors.
      (2)   Consistent with normal industry practices, a MBE may enter into
subcontracts.  If an MBE contractor subcontracts a significantly greater
portion of the work of the contract than would be expected on the basis of
normal industry practices, the MBE shall be presumed not to be performing a
commercially useful function.  The MBE may present evidence to rebut this
presumption to the MBE Officer.
   (e)   A contractor may count toward its MBE goal sixty percent (60%) of its
expenditures for materials and supplies required under a contract and obtained
from an MBE regular dealer, and one hundred percent (100%) of such expenditures
to an MBE manufacturer.
   (f)   A contractor may count toward its MBE goals the following expenditures
to MBE firms that are not manufacturers or regular dealers:
      (1)   The fees or commissions charged for providing a bona fide service,
such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial services and
assistance in the procurement of essential personnel, facilities, equipment,
materials or supplies required for performance of the contract, provided that
the fee or commission is determined by the recipient to be reasonable and not
excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services.
      (2)   The fees charged for delivery of materials and supplies required on
a job site, but not the cost of the materials and supplies themselves, when the
hauler, trucker or delivery service is not also the manufacturer of or a
regular dealer in the materials and supplies, provided that the fee is
determined by the recipient to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with
fees customarily allowed for similar services.
      (3)   The fees or commissions charged for providing any bonds or
insurance specifically required for the performance of the contract, provided
that the fee or commission is determined by the recipient to be reasonable and
not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services.
         (Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.09  COUNTING DBE PARTICIPATION.
   DBE participation shall be counted toward meeting DBE goals set in
accordance with this chapter as follows:
   (a)   Once a firm is determined to be an eligible DBE in accordance with
this chapter, the total dollar value of the contract awarded to the DBE is
counted toward the applicable DBE goals.
   (b)   The total dollars value of a contract to an DBE owned and controlled
by disadvantaged individuals is counted toward the DBE goals for disadvantaged
individuals in proportion to the percentage of ownership and control of each
group in the business.
   (c)   A contractor may count toward its DBE goals a portion of the total
dollar value of a contract with a joint venture eligible under the standards of
this chapter equal to the percentage of the ownership and controls of the DBE
partner in the joint venture.
   (d)   (1)   A contractor may count toward its DBE goals only expenditures to
DBEs that perform a commercially useful function in the work of a contract.  An
DBE is considered to perform a commercially useful function when it is
responsible for execution of a distinct element of the work of a contract and
carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and
supervising the work involved.  To determine whether an DBE is performing a
commercially useful function, the MBE Officer shall evaluate the amount of work
subcontracted, industry practices and other relevant factors.
      (2)   Consistent with normal industry practices, a DBE may enter into
subcontracts.  If an DBE contractor subcontracts a significantly greater
portion of the work of the contract than would be expected on the basis of
normal industry practices, the DBE shall be presumed not to be performing a
commercially useful function.  The DBE may present evidence to rebut this
presumption to the MBE Officer.
   (e)   A contractor may count toward its DBE goal sixty percent (60%) of its
expenditures for materials and supplies required under a contract and obtained
from an DBE regular dealer, and one hundred percent (100%) of such expenditures
to an DBE manufacturer.
   (f)   A contractor may count toward its DBE goals the following expenditures
to DBE firms that are not manufacturers or regular dealers:
      (1)   The fees or commissions charged for providing a bona fide service,
such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial services and
assistance in the procurement of essential personnel, facilities, equipment,
materials or supplies required for performance of the contract, provided that
the fee or commission is determined by the recipient to be reasonable and not
excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services.
      (2)   The fees charged for delivery of materials and supplies required on
a job site, but not the cost of the materials and supplies themselves, when the
hauler, trucker or delivery service is not also the manufacturer of or a
regular dealer in the materials and supplies, provided that the fee is
determined by the recipient to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with
fees customarily allowed for similar services.
      (3)   The fees or commissions charged for providing any bonds or
insurance specifically required for the performance of the contract, provided
that the fee or commission is determined by the recipient to be reasonable and
not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services.
         (Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.10  WAIVER OF BOND.
   (a)   The MBE Officer, with input from the Purchasing Agent, may suggest to
the City Manager, and the City Manager may determine to exempt MBEs or DBEs
from posting bid bonds with their bids and performance bonds with the execution
of contracts upon a finding that one or more of the following exist:
      (1)   The contract is for the purchase of goods, services or construction
which is consistent with the bidder's capabilities to perform.
      (2)   Such waiver does not conflict with compliance of Federal Wages and
Hour Act, the Davis Bacon Act or other Federal procedures.
      (3)   The bidder has a prior record of performance which may be used to
determine the bidder's ability to perform.
 
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrict the
applicability of State prevailing wage requirements or to exempt transactions
therefrom to the extent that such requirements would otherwise apply and be
enforceable.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.11  NONDISCRIMINATION BY CONTRACTORS.
   (a)   The goals referred to in Section
153.01 are established to encourage affirmative action by all parties who
participate in contracts with the City and apply to all contractors and
subcontractors.
 
   (b)   No contractor shall discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age,
handicap, ancestry, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, or sexual
orientation.  Contractors shall take such affirmative action as is required by
law to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated
during employment without regard to race, religion, color, sex, national
origin, age, handicap, ancestry, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, or
sexual orientation.  As used herein, "treated" means and includes without
limitation the following:  recruited whether by advertising or other means;
compensated, whether in the form of rates of pay or other forms of
compensation; selected for training, including apprenticeship, promoted,
upgraded, demoted, transferred, laid off and terminated.  Contractors shall
post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for
employment, notices to be provided by the hiring representatives of contractors
setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
 
   (c)   Any person who intentionally misrepresents himself/herself as owning,
controlling, operating or participating in a MBE or DBE for the purpose of
obtaining contracts, subcontracts, or any other benefits under this chapter
shall be guilty of theft by deception as provided in Ohio R.C. 2913.02.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90; Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
153.12  TIME REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Whenever the MBE Officer determines a contractor to be in violation of
a provision of this chapter, he shall issue a written finding setting forth
such determination and the basis of his decision, together with notice to the
contractor of the right to object to the finding.  Such written finding shall
be served upon the contractor by certified mail at such contractor's last known
address.  Any contractor taking exception to a finding of the MBE Officer first
shall attempt to reconcile the situation with the MBE Officer.  A good faith
attempt to achieve informal reconciliation is a prerequisite to the contractor
filing a written objection with the City Manager.
 
   (b)   If, after attempting to reconcile the violation by informal means, the
situation is not alleviated, a contractor may file a written objection with the
City Manager within fifteen days of the receipt by the contractor of the MBE
Officer's written finding.  Thereupon, the MBE Officer shall, within seven
days, forward to the City Manager all materials relating to the determination
which is appealed, together with recommendations of appropriate remedial action
to be taken.  The contractor may file a request for a hearing before the City
Manager when filing the written objection.
 
   (c)   If the MBE Officer finds a contractor to be in violation of this
chapter and no reconciliation is attempted by the contractor within fifteen
days of the receipt by the contractor of the written finding, the MBE Officer
shall forthwith forward his finding to the City Manager along with any
recommendation of appropriate remedial action to be taken.
 
   (d)   Under the direction of and upon authorization from the City Manager,
the MBE Officer shall determine when a violation of this section exists and
when the attempts at reconciliation taken by the contractor will not reasonably
alleviate the situation.
 
   (e)   If the contractor objects to the decision of the City Manager, the
contractor must next pursue the appeal process set forth in 49 CFR Section
23.55.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.13  THIRD PARTY COMPLAINTS.
   Any person or organization with information indicating unjust participation
by an enterprise or individuals under this program, or who believes that the
DBE and MBE participation is being improperly applied, should file a written
complaint with the City Manager which shall contain a detailed statement in
writing of the basis of the complaint.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
153.14  RECIPROCAL CERTIFICATION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
153.06, the City shall accept MBE certification by the State of Ohio granted
under Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 123:2-15 as establishing qualification
as MBE and/or DBE status for purposes of this Chapter
153 as of the date of the State of Ohio’s certification.
(Ord. 16-84. Passed 3-29-16.)
 
153.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days or both.
(Ord. 90-478.  Passed 8-28-90.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 155
City Contractors and Affirmative Action
 
155.01   Definitions.
155.02   Contracts Compliance Officer.
155.03   Affirmative action programs required.
155.04   Affirmative action programs review and approval.
155.05   Contractor filing certificate of prior affirmative action programs.
155.06   Issuance of certificates of compliance.
155.07   Contract award requires chapter compliance.
155.08   Contracts executed by contractors and subcontractors requires
compliance.
155.09   Pre-award conference.
155.10   Submission of reports to evidence compliance.
155.11   Access to and submission of records and information.
155.12   Notice to unions and employees.
155.13   Contractor's compliance duty.
155.14   Complaints.
155.15   Violation procedure.
155.16   Failure to comply; breach of contract and termination.
 
155.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall be
defined as set forth as follows:
   (a)   "Affirmative action program" means a written program wherein the
contractor takes affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and
that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race,
color, religion, natural origin, disability (provided the person is a qualified
person with a disability), sex, or sexual orientation.  Such action shall
include, but not be limited to the following:  employment, upgrading, demotion
or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; lay-off or termination;
rates of pay or other forms of compensation; selection for training, including
apprenticeship.  Each affirmative action program submitted shall include goals
and timetables for the implementation of such program and the goals to which
the contractor's good faith efforts must be directed. 
      (Ord. 94-107.  Passed 4-5-94; Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
   (b)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (c)   "Contractor" means any individual, partnership, corporation,
association or any other entity, or any combination of the foregoing employing
four or more persons who/which enters into a contract, as defined herein, with
the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (d)   "Subcontractor" means any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity, or any combination of the foregoing employing four or more
persons who/which contracts with a contractor to do a portion of the contract
executed between the contractor and the City.
   (e)   "Contract" means any contract awarded by the City whereby the City is
committed to expend or does expend its funds in return for work, labor,
services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing.
      There shall be exempted from the terms of this chapter the following
contracts:
      (1)   Contracts for service of a specialized, professional or technical
character.
      (2)   Emergency requisitions for goods, supplies or services.
      (3)   Impressed accounts in the nature of petty cash funds.
      (4)   Contracts the cost of which will not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000).
   (f)   "Construction contract" means any contract entered into between the
City and a contractor for the construction, rehabilitation, alteration,
conversion, extension or repair of buildings, highways or other improvements to
real property where the contracted for amount is ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
or more.
   (g)   "Executive Order 11246" refers to Executive Order 11246, and any
amendments thereto, as adopted and promulgated by the President of the United
States and includes all rules, regulations and directives adopted pursuant
thereto.
      (Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
   (h)   "Disability" means, with respect to an individual:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of the major life activities of such individual;
      (2)   A record of such impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   (i)   "Qualified individual with a disability" is a person with a disability
who can perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable
accommodations.  The terms "essential functions" and "reasonable
accommodations" shall have the meanings utilized in applying the federal
Americans With Disability Act.
      (Ord. 94-107.  Passed 4-5-94.)
 
155.02  CONTRACTS COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
   There is hereby established, as a part of the Community Development
Department, the position which shall perform the duties of a Contracts
Compliance Officer.  The City's Minority Business Coordinator shall perform the
duties of the Contracts Compliance Officer.  The Contracts Compliance Officer
shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter and shall,
consistent with the terms and policies of this chapter and Executive Order
11246, provide such assistance as is necessary and appropriate to help
contractors comply with the provisions of this chapter.  In the event the
Contracts Compliance Officer has reason to believe that a contractor is not in
compliance with this ordinance, the Contracts Compliance Officer shall
communicate such concerns to the City Manager and obtain the advice and
instructions from the City Manager prior to proceeding with any corrective
actions or actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-107.  Passed 4-5-94.)
 
155.03  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAMS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Each prospective contractor bidding on a City contract shall be
required to submit with his bid a written affirmative action program applicable
to the contract bid.  Such affirmative action program shall be signed by an
executive official of the contractor who has the power to bind the contractor. 
The Contracts Compliance Officer shall establish guidelines designed to assist
bidders on contracts in the planning and implementation of their respective
affirmative action programs.  Each bidding contractor shall include in his
affirmative action program that information and analysis which the Contracts
Compliance Officer, consistent with the terms and purposes of this chapter and
Executive Order 11246, may require by order or directive.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
   (b)   Private corporations, firms, or persons receiving tax abatement or tax
credit development incentives from the City shall submit a written affirmative
action program to the Contracts Compliance Officer.  Such affirmative action
program shall be signed by an executive official of the entity who has the
power to bind the entity.  The Contract Compliance Officer shall establish
guidelines designed to assist such entities in the planning and implementation
of their respective affirmative action programs.  Each such entity shall
include in its affirmative action program that information and analysis which
the Contracts Compliance Officer, consistent with the terms and purposes of
this chapter and Executive Order 11246, may require by order or directive.
(Ord. 94-107.  Passed 4-5-94.)
 
155.04  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAMS REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   The Contracts Compliance Officer shall review all affirmative action
programs submitted and either accept or reject the programs.  In determining
whether to accept or reject such programs, the Contracts Compliance Officer
shall evaluate such programs in light of the conditions, requirements and
purposes of this chapter, such rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
by such Officer and Executive Order 11246.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.05  CONTRACTOR FILING CERTIFICATE OF PRIOR AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAMS.
   If a contractor bidding on a City contract has previously filed with the
Contracts Compliance Officer an affirmative action program which was approved
by such Officer or the contractor has filed, or become a signatory to, a
governmentally recognized affirmative action program in another jurisdiction,
such contractor may comply with Section
155.03 by obtaining a certificate from the previous contracting agency
certifying that such contractor is in compliance with his affirmative action
program and by filing such certificate and a copy of his affirmative action
program with the Contracts Compliance Officer.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.06  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   The Contracts Compliance Officer may issue certificates of compliance to
contractors who successfully complete contracts with the City and who comply
with the requirements of their affirmative action program during the life of
the contract.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.07  CONTRACT AWARD REQUIRES CHAPTER COMPLIANCE.
   No contract may be awarded by the City unless the affirmative action program
submitted by the contractor is approved by the Contracts Compliance Officer as
being in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.08  CONTRACTS EXECUTED BY CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS REQUIRES CO
MPLIANCE.
   All contracts executed by a contractor and all contracts executed by a
contractor with a subcontractor shall contain an agreement that the contractor/
subcontractor agrees to be bound by the terms and purposes of this chapter and
Executive Order 11246, and each such contract shall include, through
incorporation by reference, all applicable provisions required by Executive
Order 11246.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.09  PRE-AWARD CONFERENCE.
   Prior to the awarding of any construction contract, the Contracts Compliance
Officer may hold a pre-award conference with the apparent successful bidder or
with all prospective bidders having submitted approved affirmative action
programs to discuss their affirmative action requirements pursuant to this
chapter.  Such conference shall be held at least ten days prior to the award of
contract.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.10  SUBMISSION OF REPORTS TO EVIDENCE COMPLIANCE.
   The contractor shall submit, and shall cause his subcontractors to submit,
in such forms and at such times as the Contracts Compliance Officer shall
provide by order, or directive, written reports as evidence of compliance with
the terms and purposes of this chapter and Executive Order 11246.  Such
compliance reports shall contain such information as to the practices,
policies, programs and employment policies, programs and employment statistics
of the contractor and each subcontractor as the Contracts Compliance Officer
deems necessary and appropriate to establish compliance.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.11  ACCESS TO AND SUBMISSION OF RECORDS AND INFORMATION.
   Every contractor subject to this chapter shall grant, and shall cause his
subcontractors to grant, the Contracts Compliance Officer the means, facilities
and opportunity, at all reasonable times, to examine and investigate all
persons, books, papers, records, reports or accounts as such Officer may deem
necessary to ascertain whether the contractor is, and all subcontractors are,
in compliance with the terms and purposes of this chapter and Executive Order
11246.  If requested by the Contracts Compliance Officer, such information
shall be provided in writing within ten days of the date of the request.  (Ord.
89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.12  NOTICE TO UNIONS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The contractor will send to each labor union or representative of workers
with which he has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or
understanding, a notice, to be provided by the Contracts Compliance Officer,
advising the labor union or worker's representative of the contractor's
commitments under this chapter and Executive Order 11246, and shall post copies
of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for
employment.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.13  CONTRACTOR'S COMPLIANCE DUTY.
   Each contractor shall be responsible for the implementation of his
affirmative action program and shall cause all subcontractors to comply with
the terms of such program or the affirmative action program adopted by the
subcontractor.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.14  COMPLAINTS.
   The Contracts Compliance Officer shall receive and investigate complaints of
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.15  VIOLATION PROCEDURE.
   In the event that the Contracts Compliance Officer, either on his own
initiative or after receiving and investigating a complaint, determines that a
violation of any of the terms of this chapter has occurred, he shall attempt to
eliminate such violation by means of conference, conciliation, pursuasion and
negotiation and may enter into conciliation agreements with the contractor.  If
a resolution of such violation cannot be successfully completed and the
violation continues, the Contracts Compliance Officer, after first affording
such contractor a reasonable time to correct his situation, shall recommend to
the City Manager that he proceed as provided in Section
155.16.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
155.16  FAILURE TO COMPLY; BREACH OF CONTRACT AND TERMINATION.
   If a contractor fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any of the terms
and conditions of this chapter, such failure shall be deemed a total breach of
the contract and such contract may be terminated, cancelled or suspended, in
whole or in part, by the City Manager, and such contractor may be declared
ineligible for any further City contracts for a period of up to one year. 
Provided, however, that prior to so terminating, canceling or suspending any
such contract, the City Manager shall apprise the City Commission of his
intended action.  If a contract is so terminated, cancelled or suspended, the
contractor shall have no claim for damages against the City on account of such
termination, cancellation or suspension or declaration of ineligibility.
(Ord. 89-206.  Passed 4-11-89.)
 
 
 
TITLE SEVEN - Boards and Commissions
Chap.
157.  Planning Boards and Commissions.
Chap.
163.  Civil Service Commission.
Chap.
165.  Airport Advisory Board.
Chap.
167.  Mediation Board.
Chap.
169.  Wrestling Commission.
Chap.
170.  Police Community Relations Advisory Group.
Chap.
171.  Human Relations Board and Regulations.
Chap.
172.  Community Advisory Review Board.
Chap.
173.  Fair Housing Board and Regulations.
Chap.
174.  ADA Transportation Advisory Committee.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 157
Planning Boards and Commissions
 
157.01   Creation; membership; term; vacancy.
157.02   Officers; meetings; procedure; records.
157.03   Assistance to the City Planning Board.
157.04   Powers and duties.
157.05   Conflicts with Zoning Code.
157.06   Regional Planning Commission powers and duties.
157.07   Municipal planning and platting policy objectives.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
City Planning Commissions - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 713
Zoning regulations - see
Part Eleven - Zoning Code
 
157.01  CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERM; VACANCY.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established a Planning Commission for the
City, which shall be known as the City Planning Board, and which shall consist
of nine members.  Each of the members shall serve for a period of three years
and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the City
Commission.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the members of the Planning Board
as of October 9, 1990, shall be established by an ordinance enacted by the City
Commission.  No member shall serve more than three consecutive terms.  After a
member has served during three consecutive terms he shall be ineligible for
reappointment to the Planning Board until one year has expired since his last
date of service on the Board.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the Planning Board shall be filled as in the case of
the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired term of the
member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)   All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation and
shall be subject to removal from office by a majority vote of the City
Commission.
 
   (d)   The City Commission shall appoint at least one of its members as an
advisory, nonvoting member of the Planning Board.  This City Commission member
shall not be counted as one of the nine members of the Board.
 
   (e)   Persons eligible for service on the Planning Board shall meet the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Planning Board; provided, however, one member may
serve on both the City Planning Board and the Board of Zoning Appeals and
members of the City Planning Board may serve on Regional Planning Commissions
for which the City Planning Board was a creating party.
      (2)   Persons serving on the Planning Board shall be electors of the
City.
      (3)   Persons who are members of a City employee’s family, as defined in
Section
111.04, or elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Planning Board.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Planning
Board fails to meet any of the qualifications stated in subsections (e)(1) and
(2) hereof, his office shall immediately become vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the
Planning Board, may waive any or all of the requirements of subsections (e)(1)
and (2) hereof, for such appointee or member.
 
   (f)   If any board member is absent from three of any six consecutive
regularly scheduled meetings, or if such member is unwilling or unable to
attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public business of
his board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum, his office
shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity to
explain his absence to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a majority
vote of the City Commission to complete the balance of his term.
 
   (g)   The Planning Board, constituted as hereinbefore provided, shall
exercise authority and jurisdiction in all matters pending before the Planning
Board existing prior to the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
 
157.02  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; PROCEDURE; RECORDS.
   (a)   The City Planning Board shall elect from its membership a chairperson
and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No chairperson shall serve
more than three years during a period of nine consecutive years.  The term
"year" means twelve consecutive months.  The Board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the Board shall be
held once each month, and at such additional times as the Board may determine;
provided, however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member has
proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular meetings
shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the Board.  Special meetings
shall be called by the chairperson.  There shall be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Planning Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the Community
Development Department.  The presence of five members shall constitute a
quorum.  The Board shall act by resolution and a copy of each resolution duly
adopted shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the City Commission.
(Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
 
157.03  ASSISTANCE TO THE CITY PLANNING BOARD.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to furnish the
City Planning Board and any Regional Planning Commission formed by the Planning
Board with such plats, plans, drawings and other data as it may require, and to
furnish to such Board or Regional Planning Commission such engineering
assistance as the City Manager may approve.  All other officers and employees
of the City shall render to the City Planning Board or Regional Planning
Commission such assistance as the City Commission may from time to time direct.
(Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
 
157.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the powers and duties of the
City Planning Board shall include the following:
   (a)   To make or cause to be made plans and maps of the whole or any portion
of the City, which plans and maps shall show the Board's recommendations for
the general location, character, extent, design, removal, relocation, widening
or extension of streets, alleys, ways, street fixtures, viaducts, bridges,
parks, parkways, boulevards, parking areas, playgrounds, monuments, memorials,
public works and improvements; and to make such changes and enlargements in,
and amendments and additions to, such plans and maps as are deemed advisable;
   (b)   To act and perform the functions and duties of a platting commission
or a platting commissioner for the City, in the manner permitted in Ohio R.C.
713.03 and 735.17;
   (c)   To perform all the powers and duties permitted to be performed by a
director of public service, as specified in Ohio R.C. 735.15, relating to the
location of public buildings, Municipal and County, within the City, and the
plans and specifications thereof;
   (d)   To perform all the duties and functions required of a planning
commission under Ohio R.C. 711.09, relating to major streets, thoroughfares,
parks and subdivisions within the City;
   (e)   To do and perform all duties, functions and things authorized by
municipal planning commissions to be done and performed under the provisions of
Ohio R.C. 713.01 to 713.05, inclusive, as the same now provides or hereafter
may be amended, save those acts, duties and functions herein excepted, reserved
or prohibited, and save as such provisions may be in conflict with this
chapter, or the Charter or other ordinances of the City;
   (f)   To coordinate all its activities to the extent that the same are
relevant or pertain to the duties, power and authority of the Board of
Adjustment and the Board of Park Trustees of the City and the County
Commissioners of Clark County, or any planning or zoning authority now or
hereafter created or established by the County Commissioners; and
   (g)   To provide by contract with boards of township trustees and the Board
of County Commissioners of Clark County, Ohio, for the establishment of one or
more a Regional Planning Commissions pursuant to Ohio R.C. 713.21 et seq., as
the same now provides or may hereafter be amended.  The City Planning Board
may, by means of the contract by which the City Planning Board participates in
the creation of a Regional Planning Commission to have jurisdiction within the
corporate boundaries of the City, transfer or delegate to such Regional
Planning Commission the functions, powers, and duties of the City Planning
Board, but only to the extent such functions, powers, and duties pertain to the
territory within the City over which the Regional Planning Commission shall
have jurisdiction.
   (h)   The regulatory jurisdiction of the City Planning Board is limited to
the corporate boundaries of the City.
      (Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
157.05  CONFLICTS WITH ZONING CODE.
   It is expressly provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter
shall be construed as to:
   (a)   Repeal, modify, limit or affect the provisions of the Zoning Code, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, relating to the zoning of the City, or limit
or affect the powers and responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment created by
such Code; and in the event of any conflict between the provisions of this
chapter and those of such Zoning Code, the latter shall prevail;
   (b)   Authorize the City Planning Board to incur or impose any indebtedness
or obligation against the City without the advance authority and approval of
the City Commission; or
   (c)   Limit or prevent the City Commission from overruling, in whole or in
part, modifying or amending any plan, map, recommendation or proceeding of the
Board or a Regional Planning Commission in the manner and to the extent set
forth in Ohio R.C. 713.02, as the same provides or hereafter may be amended.
      (Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
157.06  REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Should the City Planning Board transfer or delegate its functions, powers,
and duties to a Regional Planning Commission, as provided for in Subsection
157.04(g) of this Chapter, such Regional Planning Commission shall be clothed
with the following municipal powers and duties which shall be operative within
that portion of the Regional Planning Commission’s territory included within
the corporate boundaries of the City: 
   (a)   To make or cause to be made plans and maps of the whole or any portion
of the City included within the Regional Planning Commission’s territory, which
plans and maps shall show the Regional Planning Commission’s recommendations
for the general location, character, extent, design, removal, relocation,
widening or extension of streets, alleys, ways, street fixtures, viaducts,
bridges, parks, parkways, boulevards, parking areas, playgrounds, monuments,
memorials, public works and improvements; and to make such changes and
enlargements in, and amendments and additions to, such plans and maps as are
deemed advisable;
   (b)   To act and perform the functions and duties of a platting commission
or a platting commissioner for those portions of the City included within the
Regional Planning Commission’s territory, in the manner permitted in Ohio R.C.
713.03 and 735.17;
   (c)   To perform all the powers and duties permitted to be performed by a
director of public service, as specified in Ohio R.C. 735.15, relating to the
location of public buildings, Municipal and County, within those portions of
the City included within the Regional Planning Commission’s territory, and the
plans and specifications thereof;
   (d)   To perform all the duties and functions required of a planning
commission under Ohio R.C. 711.09, relating to major streets, thoroughfares,
parks and subdivisions within those portions of the City included within the
Regional Planning Commission’s territory;
   (e)   As pertaining to that portion of the City included within the Regional
Planning Commission’s territory, to do and perform all duties, functions and
things authorized by municipal planning commissions to be done and performed
under the provisions of Ohio R.C. 713.01 to 713.05, inclusive, as the same now
provides or hereafter may be amended, save those acts, duties and functions
herein excepted, reserved or prohibited, and save as such provisions may be in
conflict with this chapter, or the Charter or other ordinances of the City;
and,
   (f)   As pertaining to that portion of the City included within the Regional
Planning Commission’s territory, to coordinate all its activities to the extent
that the same are relevant or pertain to the duties, power and authority of the
Board of Adjustment and the Board of Park Trustees of the City and the County
Commissioners of Clark County, or any planning or zoning authority now or
hereafter created or established by the County Commissioners.
   The said Regional Planning Commission shall exercise the powers and duties
transferred or delegated to it pursuant to this Section and Subsection
157.04(g) so as to implement the municipal planning and platting policy
objectives described in Section
157.07 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
 
157.07  MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND PLATTING POLICY  OBJECTIVES.
   With respect to planning and platting in the City, it is the policy of the
City to:
   (a)   Protect the public health, safety morals and general welfare,
   (b)   Maintain and enhance property values in the Springfield community,
   (c)   Stabilize neighborhoods,
   (d)   Promote orderly development to optimize the quality of life for the
City’s residents, facilitate the creation and preservation of employment
opportunities and enhance the economic prosperity of the Springfield community,
   (e)   Control population density to preserve the benefits of light and air
to Springfield residents and to avert the deleterious effects of urban
congestion,
   (f)   Encourage the development of affordable housing,
   (g)   Not unnecessarily burden the free and peaceful practice of religion in
the Springfield community,
   (h)   Minimize adverse impacts on neighboring lands near the City’s
boundaries and to preserve the spirit of cooperation among political
subdivisions participating in Cooperative Economic Development Agreements,
Joint Economic Development Districts and similar inter-governmental cooperation
arrangements involving the City,
   (i)   Conserve agricultural land most suitable for agricultural uses to
preserve its economic, environmental and aesthetic benefits for the Springfield
community,
   (j)   Focus growth and development in appropriate areas which balance
environmental, economic and infrastructure considerations,
   (k)   Protect and conserve water, land and air resources and mitigate
conflicting land uses that may harm environmental quality,
   (l)   Provide for and protect open space and park and recreational systems
to ensure accessibility for all Springfield residents,
   (m)   Provide for the coordination of public thoroughfares and for effective
and safe traffic flow and avoidance of traffic congestion in the Springfield
community,
   (o)   Provide for and facilitate a multi-modal transportation system with
sensitivity to land use relationships, and
   (p)   Provide space for adequate energy delivery infrastructure,
communications infrastructure and public water, wastewater and drainage
infrastructure and to promote development where such infrastructure has been
provided for.
The Planning Board and Regional Planning Commissions provided for in this
Chapter shall exercise their powers so as to implement the foregoing City
policy concerning planning and platting matters.
(Ord. 02-350.  Passed 9-3-02.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 159
Board of Health
Repealed by Ord. 96-209, passed June 11, 1996
 
 
 
CHAPTER 161
Board of Parks and Recreation
 
Repealed by Ord. 99-323, passed October 5, 1999
 
 
 
CHAPTER 163
Civil Service Commission
 
163.01   Membership on the Civil Service Commission.
163.02   Meetings, records, general procedures.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission - see CHTR.
Sec. 47
Municipal civil service commissions - see Ohio R.C. 124.40 et seq.
 
163.01  MEMBERSHIP ON THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (a)   Persons appointed to service on the Civil Service Commission shall
meet the following qualifications in addition to those qualifications set forth
in the City's Charter.  Persons who have served during three consecutive terms
on the Civil Service Commission shall be ineligible for reappointment to the
Commission until one year has expired since his last date of service on the
Commission.
 
   (b)   A person who is either a member of a City employee’s family, as
defined in Section
111.04, or a person serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Civil Service Commission.
(Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
 
   (c)   The City Commission by ordinance, and upon finding that the particular
expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the Civil Service
Commission, may waive the requirement of subsection (b) hereof for such
appointee or member.
 
   (d)   If any Commission member is absent from three of any six consecutive
regularly scheduled commission meetings, or if such member is unwilling or
unable to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public
business of his board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum,
is office shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the
opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be
reappointed by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance
of his term.
(Ord. 95-96.  Passed 3-14-95.)
 
163.02  MEETINGS, RECORDS, GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The Civil Service Commission shall elect from its membership a
chairperson.  No chairperson shall serve more than three years during a period
of nine consecutive years.  The term "year" means twelve consecutive months. 
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with law and
ordinance.  Meetings of the Commission shall be held once each month and, at
such additional times as the Commission may determine; provided, however, the
chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member has proposed business to be
conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular meetings shall be specified in
the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission.  Special meetings
shall be called by the chairperson.  There shall be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Civil Service Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the action of the Commission and the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of all its official action, all of which shall be filed promptly with
the Clerk of the City Commission.  The presence of three members shall
constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 02-54.  Passed 2-5-02.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 165
Airport Advisory Board
 
165.01   Creation; members; term; vacancy.
165.02   Officers; meetings; records; quorum; reports.
165.03   Powers and duties.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Airports - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4563
Airport Division - see ADM.
127.05
Municipal airport - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
959
 
165.01  CREATION; MEMBERS; TERM; VACANCY.
   (a)   The Airport Advisory Board shall consist of five members.  Each of the
members shall serve for a period of three years and shall be appointed by the
Mayor with consent and approval of the City Commission.  No member shall serve
more than two consecutive terms.  After a member has served during two
consecutive terms he shall be ineligible for reappointment to the Airport
Advisory Board until one year has expired since his last date of service on the
Board.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the Airport Advisory Board shall be filled as in the
case of the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired term
of the member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)   All members of the Airport Advisory Board shall serve without
compensation and shall be subject to removal from office by a majority of the
City Commission.
 
   (d)   Persons eligible for service on the Airport Advisory Board shall meet
the following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Airport Advisory Board.
      (2)   Four of the five Board members shall be electors of the City.  One
member need not be an elector of the City.
         (Ord. 14-114. Passed 5-13-14.)
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, elected public
officials shall not be eligible to serve on the Airport Advisory Board. A
member of a City employee’s family as defined in Section
111.04, shall not be eligible for service.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10.12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, if any member of the
Airport Advisory Board fails to meet any of the qualifications stated in
subsection (d)(1) through (3) hereof, his office shall immediately become
vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the
Airport Advisory Board, may waive any or all of the requirements of subsections
(d)(1) and (2) hereof for such appointee or member.
 
   (e)   If any member of the Airport Advisory Board, appointed by the City
Commission, is absent from three of any six consecutive regularly scheduled
Board meetings, or if such member is unwilling or unable to attend a regularly
scheduled prearranged discussion of the public business of his board which
fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum, his office shall
immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity to explain
his absence to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a majority vote of
the City Commission to complete the balance of his term.
(Ord. 97-267.  Passed 7-22-97.)
 
165.02  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RECORDS; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   (a)   The Airport Advisory Board shall elect from its membership a
chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No chairperson
shall serve more than two years during a period of six consecutive years.  The
term "year" means twelve consecutive months.  The Board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the Board shall be
held every other month, and at such additional times as the Board may
determine; provided, however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member
has proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular
meetings shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the Board.  Special
meetings shall be called by the chairperson.  There shall be a fixed place of
meeting.
 
   (b)   The Airport Advisory Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of all of its official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the
office of the Airport Manager.  The presence of four members shall constitute a
quorum.  The Board shall  act  by  resolution and  a copy of each resolution 
duly adopted  shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the City
Commission.  The Airport Manager or his duly authorized representative shall
serve as Secretary to the Airport Advisory Board.
 
   (c)   The Airport Advisory Board shall make such annual and other reports as
may be required by the City Commission.
(Ord. 97-267.  Passed 7-22-97.)
 
165.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Without limitation on the general powers or authority necessary or
incidental to the purposes for which the Municipal Airport Advisory Board is
appointed, the duties of the Board shall be to study matters affecting and
concerning the Springfield Municipal Airport and to make recommendations to and
advise the City Manager and the City Commission from time to time through the
Airport Manager on policy matters, such rules, regulations and ordinances
governing the management, development and control of the airport.  The Board
shall study such other matters as the City Manager or the City Commission may
designate from time to time.
   The powers and duties of the Board are advisory in nature only and under no
circumstances shall the Board have the power to enter into financial
obligations on the part of the City, or in any way to incur any liability or
obligation on the part of the City.
(Ord. 83-194.  Passed 4-19-83.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 167
Mediation Board
 
167.01   Establishment; membership; term; vacancy.
167.02   Officers; meetings; procedures; records.
167.03   Powers and duties.
 
167.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERM; VACANCY.
   (a)  A Mediation Board is hereby established.  The Board shall consist of
eight members.  Each member shall serve for a period of three years and shall
be confirmed by the City Commission.  The Board shall consist of one City
Commissioner, who shall be a non-voting liaison; two representative from the
community; one City of Springfield Police Officer; one member from the Board of
Human Relations; and three volunteer mediators.  City Commission shall accept
recommendations for board members from each of the representative organizations
and the Community Development Director.  No member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.  After a member has served during two consecutive terms, he
shall be ineligible for reappointment to the Mediation Board until one year has
expired since his last date of service on the Mediation Board.
 
   (b)  Any vacancy on the Mediation Board shall be filled as in the case of
the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired term of the
member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)  All members of the Mediation Board shall serve without compensation and
shall be subject to removal from office by a majority vote of the City
Commission.
 
   (d)  Persons eligible for service on the Mediation Board shall meet the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City Board or Commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Mediation Board, with the exception of the one member
appointed from the Human Relations Board and the one member from the City
Commission, who shall be a non-voting liaison.
      (2)   Persons serving on the Mediation Board shall be electors of the
City and shall have completed a mediation training program within three months
of appointment.
      (3)   A person who is either a member of a City employee’s families, as
defined in Section
111.04, or an elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Mediation Board, except the member appointed from the City Commission, who
shall be a non-voting liaison.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Mediation
Board shall fail to meet any of the qualifications stated in subsections (d)(1)
through (3) hereof, his office shall immediately become vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential member is needed on the Mediation Board,
may waive any or all of the requirements of subsection (d)(1) and (2) hereof
for such member.
 
   (e)   If any Mediation Board member is absent from two of any four
consecutive regular, quarterly meetings of the Mediation Board, or if such
member is unwilling or unable to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged
discussion of the public business of his board which fails to qualify as a
"meeting" for lack of quorum, is office shall immediately become vacant.  Such
member shall have the opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission
and may be reappointed by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete
the balance of his term.
(Ord. 95-96.  Passed 3-14-95.)                               
 
167.02  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; PROCEDURES; RECORDS.
   (a)  The Mediation Board shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and
such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No Chairperson shall serve more
than two years during a period of six consecutive years.  The term "year" means
twelve consecutive months.  The Mediation Board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the Mediation Board
shall be held once each quarter, during the second week of January, April,
July, and October, and at such additional times as the Board may determine. 
The time of regular meetings shall be specified in the rules and regulations of
the Mediation Board.  Special meetings shall be held within the City limits of
Springfield.
 
   (b)  The Mediation Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
action of the Mediation Board and the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of all its official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the office
of the Mediation Board and shall be a public record.  The presents of four
members shall constitute a quorum.  The Mediation Board shall act by resolution
and a copy of each resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the Office of the
Clerk of the City Commission.
 
167.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)  The duties of the Mediation Board shall be to adopt policies and
procedures for the conduct of mediation sessions to evaluate volunteer
mediators, to evaluate the City`s mediation program and to report to and advise
the City Commission concerning activities of the Mediation Board and the
operation of the City's mediation program.
 
 
   (b)  The Mediation Board shall conduct mediation proceedings to resolve
disputes between Springfield residents involving the following circumstances:
Neighbor-to-neighbor disputes, neighborhood parking and boundaries, animal
nuisances, disturbing the peace and other services as determined by the
Mediation Board to be appropriate for its services.  Mediation services will be
provided on a non-discriminatory basis to all City residents regardless of age,
race, creed, color, national origin, sexual orientation, handicap, or gender.
      (Ord. 91-401.  Passed 10-1-91.)
CHAPTER 169
Wrestling Commission
 
Repealed by Ordinance No. 12-111; April 10, 2012
 
 
 
CHAPTER 170
Police Community Relations Advisory Group
 
170.01   Creation; members; term; vacancy.
170.02   Officers; meetings; records; quorum; reports.
170.03   Powers and duties.
 
170.01  CREATION; MEMBERS; TERM; VACANCY.
   (a)   The Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall consist of seven
members.  Each of the members shall serve for a period of three years and shall
be appointed by the Mayor with consent and approval of the City Commission.  No
member shall serve more than three consecutive terms.  After a member has
served during three consecutive terms he shall be ineligible for reappointment
to the Police Community Relations Advisory Group until one year has expired
since his last date of service on the Advisory Group. Original appointments
shall be staggered, such that three originally appointed members shall have a
term of three years; three originally appointed members shall have a term of
two years; and one originally appointed member shall have a term of one year.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall be
filled as in the case of the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the
unexpired term of the member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)   All members of the Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall
serve without compensation and shall be subject to removal from office by a
majority of the City Commission.
 
   (d)   Persons eligible for service on the Police Community Relations
Advisory Group shall meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Police Community Relations Advisory Group.
      (2)   All seven Advisory Group members shall be electors of the City. 
Members shall be community leaders selected to represent neighborhood groups,
the business community, the religious community, and other sectors of the
community.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, elected public
officials shall not be eligible to serve on the Police Community Relations
Advisory Group. A member of a City employee’s family, as defined in Section
111.04, shall not be eligible for service.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   No person shall be appointed to, or continue to serve as, a member
if such person has a criminal felony conviction of any type, or a criminal
conviction for an offense against a police officer, such as resisting arrest,
assaulting a police officer, or obstructing official business, within the last
seven (7) years prior to that person’s appointment, or at anytime during that
person’s service as a member.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, if any member of the
Police Community Relations Advisory Group fails to meet any of the
qualifications stated in subsection (d)(1) through (4) hereof, his office shall
immediately become vacant.
      (6)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the Police
Community Relations Advisory Group, may waive any or all of the requirements of
subsections (d)(1) and (2) hereof for such appointee or member.
 
   (e)   If any member of the Police Community Relations Advisory Group,
appointed by the City Commission, is absent from three of any six consecutive
regularly scheduled Advisory Group meetings, or if such member is unwilling or
unable to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public
business of the Advisory Group which fails to qualify as a “meeting” for lack
of quorum, his office shall immediately become vacant.  Such members shall have
the opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be
reappointed by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance
of his term.
 
   (f)   No Advisory Group member shall disclose any information or document
which may come to his or her attention during the course of the member’s
service upon the Police Community Relations Advisory Group if the Chief of
Police has identified such information or document as confidential and directed
that the same not be disclosed.
(Ord. 03-358.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
170.02  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RECORDS; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   (a)   The Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall elect from its
membership a chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No
chairperson shall serve more than two years during a period of six consecutive
years.  The term “year” means twelve consecutive months.  The Advisory Group
shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with law and ordinances.  Meetings
of the Advisory Group shall be held every other month, and at such additional
times as the Advisory Group may determine; provided, however, the chairperson
may cancel a meeting if no member has proposed business to be conducted at the
meeting.  The time of regular meetings shall be specified in the rules and
regulations of the Advisory Group.  Special meetings shall be called by the
chairperson.  There shall be fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the action of the Advisory Group and the vote of each
member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of all of its official action, all of which shall
be filed promptly in the office of the Police Chief.  The presence of four
members shall constitute a quorum.  The Advisory Group shall act by resolution
and a copy of each resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk of the City Commission.  The Police Chief or his duly authorized
representative shall serve as Secretary to the Advisory Group.
 
   (c)   The Police Community Relations Advisory Group shall make such annual
and other reports as may be required by the City Commission.
(Ord. 03-358.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
170.03  POWERS AND DUTIES
   Without limitation on the general powers or authority necessary or
incidental to the purposes for which the Police Community Relations Advisory
Group is appointed, the duties of the Advisory Group shall be to study matters
affecting and concerning the relationship between the Police Division and
members of the community and to make recommendations to and advise the Police
Chief, City Manager and the City Commission from time-to-time through the City
Manager on policy matters, including, but not limited to, specifically the
following issues:
   (1)   recruitment of a racially and culturally diverse workforce at all
levels of the Police Division.
   (2)   the provision and monitoring of effective cultural diversity training;
   (3)   identification and elimination of any racial profiling practices;
   (4)   defining and evaluating the process by which citizen complaints are
handled; and
   (5)   working with the Police Chief to identify specific community issues
and concerns at the earliest possible stage.
 
   The Advisory Group shall study such other matters as the Police Chief, City
Manager or the City Commission may designate from time-to-time.
(Ord. 03-358.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 171
Human Relations Board and Regulations
 
171.01   Definitions.
171.02   Board created; membership; term; vacancy.
171.03   Officers; meetings; procedure; records.
171.04   Board duties.
171.05   Additional Board powers.
171.06   Community Development Director.
171.07   Community Development Department.
171.08   Civil Rights Attorney.
171.09   Complaint procedure.
171.10   Injunction.
171.11   Section repealed by Ord. 92-179, passed 5-27-92.
171.12   Records and reports.
171.13   Continuance of pending proceedings.
171.99   Violations; penalties.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Discrimination - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4112
 
171.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Age" means at least forty years old.
   (b)   "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in section 3719.01 of
the Ohio Revised Code.
   (c)   "Person" means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and other organized groups of persons.  It also includes,
but is not limited to, any owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager, broker,
salesman, agent, employee, lending institution, and the City of Springfield and
any officer or employee thereof.
   (d)   "Employer" means the City of Springfield and any officer or employee
thereof, any person employing four or more persons, and any person acting in
the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly.
   (e)   "Employee" does not include any individual employed in the domestic
service of any person.
   (f)   "Labor organization" means any organization which exists for the
purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with
employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or for
other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment.
   (g)   "Employment agency" means any person regularly undertaking with or
without compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit,
refer or place employees.
   (h)   "Physical or mental impairment" includes any of the following:
      (1)    Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement,
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine;
      (2)    Any mental or psychological disorder, including, but not limited
to, mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness,
and specific learning disabilities;
      (3)    Diseases and conditions, including, but not limited to,
orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism,
epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease,
diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus infection, mental retardation, emotional
illness, drug addiction, and alcoholism.
      (4)    "Physical or mental impairment" does not include any of the
following:
         A.   Homosexuality and bisexuality;
         B.    Transvestism, transsexualism, pedophilia, exhibitionism,
voyeurism, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments,
or other sexual behavior disorders;
         C.    Compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania;
         D.    Psychoactive substance use disorders resulting from current
illegal use of a controlled substance.
   (i)   "Public accommodations" means any business, enterprise or activity
consisting of or involving furnishing, providing or making available to the
public any goods, services, accommodations, facilities, advantages or
privileges, and includes any activity engaged in pursuant to the performance of
any public duty.
   (j)   "Discriminatory practice" means any act, practice or course of conduct
constituting or resulting in inequality of treatment of any person because of
race, religion, color, ancestry, national origin, handicap, age, sex, or sexual
orientation in the areas of employment, education, public accommodations or
economic opportunity.  As used in this chapter, "discriminatory practice"
includes, but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   For any employer, because of the race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation of any person, to
refuse to hire or otherwise to discriminate against him with respect to hire,
tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, or any matter directly
or indirectly related to employment.
      (2)   For an employment agency to:
         A.   Refuse or fail to accept, register, classify properly or refer to
employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any person because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, handicap, age, sex, or sexual
orientation, or
         B.   Comply with a request from an employer for referral of applicants
for employment if the request or any other matters known to such employment
agency reasonably indicate, directly or indirectly, that the employer engages
or shall engage in a discriminatory practice in connection with the hiring of
any employee.
      (3)   For any labor organization to:
         A.   Limit or classify its membership on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation,
or
         B.   Discriminate against any person or limit his employment
opportunities, or otherwise adversely effect his status as an employee, or his
wages, hours or employment conditions, because of his race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation.
      (4)   For any employer, labor organization or joint labor-management
committee controlling apprentice training programs to discriminate against any
person because of his race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation in admission to, or employment in any
program established to provide apprentice training.
      (5)   For any person to:
         A.   Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by mortgage or
otherwise, to any person because of the race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation of any such person,
provided such lender, whether an individual, corporation or association of any
type, lends money as one of the principal aspects of his business or incidental
to his principal business; or
         B.   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any
loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, because of the
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, age, sex, or sexual
orientation of any such person.
      (6)   For any person in any manner engaged in any public accommodations
to deny to any person, except for reasons applicable alike to all persons,
regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, handicap, age,
sex, or sexual orientation the full enjoyment of the goods, services,
accommodations, facilities, advantages or privileges thereof.
      (7)   For any person to discriminate in any manner against any other
person because he has opposed any practice defined in this section or because
he has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any
investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter.
      (8)   The provisions of this Chapter as they pertain to discriminatory
practices based on sexual orientation shall not apply to religious schools,
churches that are engaged in religious activities, parachurch organizations, or
any nonprofit institution, or organization operated, supervised, or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society,
and owner-occupied residences with not more than three (3) unrelated renters.
   (k)   "Handicap" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities, including the functions of caring for
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning, and working; a record of a physical or mental impairment;
or being regarded as having a physical or mental impairment.
      (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
171.02  BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERM; VACANCY.
   (a)   A Human Relations Board is hereby established which shall consist of
seven members.  Each of the members shall serve for a period of three years and
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the City
Commission.  No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.  After a
member has served during two consecutive terms he shall be ineligible for
reappointment to the Human Relations Board until one year has expired since his
last date of service on the Board.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the Human Relations Board shall be filled as in the
case of the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired term
of the member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)   All members of the Human Relations Board shall serve without
compensation and shall be subject to removal from office by a majority of the
City Commission.
 
   (d)   Persons eligible for service on the Human Relations Board shall meet
the following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Human Relations Board.
      (2)   Persons serving on the Human Relations Board shall be electors of
the City.
      (3)   A person who is a member of a City employee’s family, as defined in
Section
111.04, or an elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Human Relations Board.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Human
Relations Board shall fail to meet any of the qualifications stated in
subsection (d)(1) through (3) hereof, his office shall immediately become
vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the Board,
may waive any or all of the requirements of subsections (d)(1) and (2) hereof
for such appointee or member.
 
   (e)   If any Human Relations Board member is absent from three of any six
consecutive regularly scheduled Board meetings, or if such member is unwilling
or unable to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public
business of his board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum,
his office shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the
opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be
reappointed by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance
of his term.
(Ord. 95-96.  Passed 3-14-95.)
       
171.03  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; PROCEDURE; RECORDS.
   (a)   The Human Relations Board shall elect from its membership a
chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No chairperson
shall serve more than two years during a period of six consecutive years.  The
term "year" means twelve consecutive months.  The Board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the Board shall be
held once each month, and at such additional times as the Board may determine;
provided, however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member has
proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular meetings
shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the Board.  Special meetings
may be called by the chairperson, Director of Community Development or by any
two members of the Board.  There shall be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Human Relations Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of all of its official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the
office of the Community Development Director.  The presence of four members
shall constitute a quorum.  The Board shall act by resolution and a copy of
each resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the office of the Director of
the Community Development Department.  The Director of Community Development or
his appointee shall serve as Secretary to the Human Relations Board. 
(Ord. 90-568.  Passed 10-23-90.)
 
171.04  BOARD DUTIES.
   (a)   The Human Relations Board shall:
      (1)   By means of public hearing or otherwise investigate and study any
conditions having an adverse affect on inter-group relations in the City and
the problems of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination as they
affect the public safety and general welfare of the City;
      (2)   Institute and conduct educational and other programs to promote the
equal rights and opportunities of all persons, regardless of their race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, age, sex, or sexual
orientation.  In the performance of its duties the Board may cooperate with
interested citizens, private agencies, business entities, non-profit
organizations, educational institutions and agencies of the federal, State and
local governments;
      (3)   Appoint hearing examiners who shall be admitted to the practice of
law in the State of Ohio and other employees as it deems necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.  No commitments for employees or
services shall ever exceed the appropriations made by the City Commission for
such purposes;
      (4)   Receive, investigate and pass upon written charges made under oath
of policies, practices or courses of conduct prohibited by Section
171.01;
      (5)   On a periodic basis review discrimination complaint processing
carried out by the Ohio Civil Rights Commission as such complaints relate to
activities occurring in the City of Springfield;
      (6)   Adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations and
other guidelines to effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
      (7)   Foster through community efforts or otherwise, good will among the
groups and elements of the City of Springfield;
      (8)   Study the problems of discrimination in all or specific fields of
human relations and make periodic surveys, gather data, and publish statistical
summaries of the results of investigations and research into the existence and
effect of discrimination because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national
origin, handicap, age, sex, or sexual orientation or the enjoyment of civil
rights and human rights by persons within the City to the extent that, in the
Board's judgment, will tend to promote good will and minimize or eliminate
discrimination; and
      (9)   Submit reports and recommendations to the City Commission from time
to time, but not less than once a year describing the work performed by the
Board.  The Board shall submit an annual report to the City Commission
describing the effectiveness of discrimination complaint processing conducted
by the Ohio Civil Rights Commission on matters occurring in the City of
Springfield.  Reports may include a copy of any surveys or other studies
prepared by the Board and may include recommendations of the Board as to
remedial action, legislative and otherwise.
   (b)   The Board may:
      (1)   Meet and function at any place within the City;
      (2)   Adopt goals and objectives in carrying out the mission of the Board
and at least annually review and update the goals and objectives:
      (3)   Initiate and undertake on its own motion, investigations of
discriminatory practices as defined in Section
171.01; and
      (4)   Upon the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the Board,
pursuant to a finding by such members of the necessity and propriety therefor,
issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses and for the
production of relevant papers, documents and other evidence at any time
subsequent to the filing or initiation of a complaint alleging a discriminating
practice.
         (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
171.05  ADDITIONAL BOARD POWERS.
   The Human Relations Board may:
   (a)   Prepare and promulgate:
      (1)   Rules and regulations for the conducting of hearings before the
Board or its Hearing Examiner;
      (2)   Guidelines for affirmative action programs; and
      (3)   Informational and educational materials, including but not limited
to those pertaining to requirements of law in regard to recruitment and hiring
of employees and terms and conditions of employment.
   (b)   Enter into and perform agreements with a government subdivision or
agency thereof providing for the exchange of information and data relating to
human relations, civil rights and discriminatory practices.  No other provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or prevent the furnishing of any
such information and data pursuant to any such agreement.
 
171.06  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   There shall be a Community Development Director who shall be appointed and
removable by the City Manager.  The Director shall be the principal
administrative officer of the Community Development Department, and he shall
supervise and direct the employees of such Department.  In the event of
dismissal, the Director shall receive thirty-day severance pay.
(Ord. 80-207.  Passed 4-22-80.)
 
171.07  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby created the Community Development Department, as provided in
Chapter
131, which Department shall perform the principal administrative functions
necessary to properly implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 80-207.  Passed 4-22-80.)
 
171.08  CIVIL RIGHTS ATTORNEY.
   The Director of Law shall assign to a member of his staff, who is hereby
designated the "Civil Rights Attorney", the duty to provide such legal advice,
services, and representation as may be required by the Human Relations Board.
   When necessary, the Director may employ special counsel to act as and to
perform the duties of the Civil Rights Attorney.
 
171.09  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Preliminary Investigation.  Whenever it is charged in writing and
under oath, by a person, referred to as the "complainant" that any person,
referred to as the "respondent" has engaged or is engaging in any act, practice
or course of conduct defined as a discriminatory  practice in Section
171.01, or upon its own initiative in matters relating to such discriminatory
practices, the Human Relations Board shall initiate a preliminary
investigation.  Such preliminary investigation shall be an attempt to determine
whether or not there is any merit to the charge.  The preliminary investigation
shall be confidential, unless the Board shall determine after such preliminary
investigation that it is "probable" that any discriminatory practices have been
or are being engaged in.  If the Board determines after such preliminary
investigation that it is not probable that any discriminatory practice has
occurred, the Board dismisses the complaint and shall notify the respondent and
the complainant of its action.  No such complaint shall be made later than 180
days after the date of occurrence of the act or practice complained of.
 
   (b)   Informal Methods.  If the Board determines that it is probable that
any discriminatory practice has occurred, it shall endeavor to eliminate such
practices by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion, which
proceedings may include or involve the execution by the parties of a written
conciliation agreement setting forth the manner, terms and conditions of the
resolution of such dispute and requiring compliance with any such terms and
conditions.  Nothing said or done during any such endeavors at conciliation
shall be disclosed by any member of the Board or its staff or be used in any
subsequent proceedings.  If, after such investigation and conference, the Board
is satisfied that any discriminatory practice of the respondent shall be
eliminated, it may treat the complaint as conciliated, and entry of such
disposition shall be made on the records of the Board.  If the Board fails to
effect the elimination of any discriminatory practice and to obtain voluntary
compliance with this chapter, the Board shall issue and cause to be served upon
any person or respondent a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice of hearing before a hearing examiner appointed by the Board
at a place therein fixed to be held not less than ten days after the service of
such complaint.  Such hearing shall be in the Municipal Building or at such
other place located within the City as may be designated by the Board.  The
City Law Director, a member of his staff or an attorney appointed by the Board
shall represent the Board at such hearing.
 
   (c)   Complaints Amended.  Any complaint may be amended by the Board or its
hearing examiner conducting the hearing, at any time prior to or during the
hearing based thereon.  The respondent shall have the right to file an answer
or to amend an answer to the original or amended complaint, and to appear at
such hearing in person, or by attorney or otherwise to examine and cross-
examine witnesses.
 
   (d)   Hearings.  The complainant shall be a part to the proceeding and any
person who is an indispensable party to a complete determination or settlement
of a question involved in a proceeding shall be joined.  Any person who has or
claims an interest in the subject of the hearing and in obtaining or preventing
relief against the acts or practices complained of may be, in the discretion of
the person or persons conducting the hearing, permitted to appear for the
presentation of oral or written arguments.
   In any proceeding, the hearing examiner or Board shall not be bound by the
rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law or equity, but shall, in
ascertaining the practices followed by the respondent, take into account all
reliable, probative and substantive evidence, statistical or otherwise,
produced at the hearing, which may tend to prove the existence or nonexistence
of any discriminatory practices.
   The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be reduced
to writing and filed with the Board.  Thereafter, at its discretion, the Board
or its hearing examiner upon notice to the complainant and to the respondent
with an opportunity to be present may take further testimony or hear argument.
   No person shall be compelled to be a witness against himself at any hearing
before the Board or a hearing examiner of the Board.
 
   (e)   Hearing Examiner Determination.  If upon all the reliable, probative
and substantive evidence the hearing examiner determines that the respondent
has engaged in, or is engaging in, any discriminatory practice charged in the
complaint, he shall state in writing to the Board his findings of fact and
conclusions of law and any recommendations which he may have concerning
remedial actions to be taken.  Whereupon, the Board shall issue and cause to be
served on such respondent an order requiring him to cease and desist from such
discriminatory practice and to take such further affirmative or other action as
shall effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees with, or without back pay,
admission or restoration to union membership, including a requirement for
reports of the manner of compliance.  If the Board directs payment of back pay,
it shall make allowance for interim earnings.  Upon the submission of such
reports of compliance, the Board may issue a declaratory order stating that the
respondent has ceased to engage in any discriminatory practices.
   If the Hearing Examiner finds that no probable cause exists for crediting
the charges, or if upon all the evidence, the Hearing Examiner finds that a
respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practices against the
complainant or others, he shall state in writing to the Board his finding of
fact and conclusion of law and shall issue and cause to be served on the
complainant and the respondent an order dismissing such complaint as to such
respondent.
 
   (f)   Judicial Review.  Any party to the proceeding, claiming to be
aggrieved by final order of the Board, including a determination by it that a
prima facie case was not established by the complainant, may obtain judicial
review thereof by a resort to any court of competent jurisdiction in accordance
with the provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2506.
 
171.10  INJUNCTION.
   (a)   The existence of any discriminatory practice and the commission of any
act constituting the same, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any
person injured or aggrieved thereby may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an order enjoining the continuance of any such practice or
act.
 
   (b)   Whenever deemed necessary in order to protect the rights of the
complainant and to preserve the power to the Human Relations Board to act upon
or to resolve a complaint, the Civil Rights Attorney may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for an injunction directed against a respondent,
restraining him from taking any action which would prevent the Board from
acting or which would make any order issued by the Board meaningless.
 
171.11  SECTION REPEALED BY ORD. 92-179, PASSED 5-27-92.
 
171.12  RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Each employer, labor organization and employment agency within the City
shall:
   (a)   Make and keep such records relevant to the determination of whether
discriminatory practices are being engaged in; and
   (b)   Preserve such records for such periods and make such reports therefrom
to the Human Relations Board as the Board shall determine to be reasonable,
necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter.
 
171.13  CONTINUANCE OF PENDING PROCEEDINGS.
   Any and all proceedings heretofore commenced under heretofore existing
Chapter
171, shall not abate or terminate, but shall be prosecuted and concluded in
accordance with the procedures established by this chapter.
 
171.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person who fails to comply with a subpoena issued by the Human
Relations Board is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
 
   (b)   Any person who fails to comply with a conciliation agreement or any
order issued by the Board as provided in Section
171.09 is guilty of misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day's noncompliance
with any such agreement or order shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
 
   (c)   Any person who engages in conduct constituting a discriminatory
practice is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
   (d)   Any person who fails to comply with any requirement of Section
171.12 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 172
Community Grant Advisory Board
 
172.01   Establishment; membership; terms; vacancy.
172.02   Chairpersons; meetings; records; quorum.
172.03   Powers and duties.
 
172.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; VACANCY.
   (a)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall consist of 11 members
appointed by a majority vote of the City Commission.  Each of the members shall
serve for a term of three (3) years or until the member's successor is duly
appointed.  No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. After a
member has served two consecutive terms, he/she shall be ineligible for
reappointment to the board until one year has expired since the last date of
service to the board.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the Community Grant Advisory Board shall be filled as
in the case of the original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired
term of the member whose vacancy is so filed.
 
   (c)   All members of the Community Grant Advisory Board shall serve without
compensation and shall be subject to removal from office by a majority vote of
the City Commission.
 
   (d)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall be composed of the following
members:
      (1)   One representative of Springfield Metropolitan Housing Authority;
      (2)   One housing provider;
      (3)   One supportive services organization;
      (4)   One realtor;
      (5)   One neighborhood representative;
      (6)   One educator or educational institution representative;
      (7)   Three residents of qualified low-to-moderate-income census tracts
(including one homeless or formerly homeless representative);
      (8)   Two members employed or providing services in qualified low-to-
moderate-income census tracts
 
City-wide civic organizations or service clubs, the City Planning Board,
business and supportive services organizations, and educational institutions
may make nominations to the City Commission of members of their organizations
for appointment as a member of the Community Grant Advisory Board.
 
   (e)   Persons eligible for service on the Community Grant Advisory Board
shall meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or Commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Community Grant Advisory Board; with the exception
that, one member may serve on both the City Planning Board and on the Community
Grant Advisory Board.
      (2)   All members of the Community Grant Advisory Board shall be electors
of the City.
      (3)   A person who is a member of a City employee’s family, as defined in
Section
111.04, or an elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Community Grant Advisory Board, except the member appointed from the City
Commission who shall be a non-voting member.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Community
Grant Advisory Board shall fail to meet any of the qualifications stated in
subsections (e)(1) through (e)(4) hereof, his office shall immediately become
vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential member is needed on the Community Grant
Advisory Board, may waive any or all of the requirements of subsections (e)(1)
and (e)(2) hereof for such member.
      (6)   Members of the Community Grant Advisory Board appointed as
representatives of census tracts or block groups, must be a current resident of
such census tract or block group at the time of their appointment and must have
resided in the census tract or block group for at least twelve months prior to
their date of appointment.
 
   (f)   If any member of the Community Grant Advisory Board is absent from
three (3) of any six (6) consecutive regularly scheduled board meetings, or if
such member is unwilling or unable to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged
discussion of the public business of this board which fails to qualify as a
"meeting" for lack of quorum, his office shall immediately become vacant.  Such
member shall have the opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission
and may be reinstated by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete the
balance of his term.
 
172.02  CHAIRPERSON; MEETINGS; RECORDS; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   (a)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall elect from its membership a
chairperson and other such officers as it may deem necessary. No chairperson
shall serve more than two years during a period of six consecutive years.  The
term “year” means twelve consecutive months. The board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law and ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be
held once each month, and at such additional times as the chairperson may
determine; provided, however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member
has proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular
meetings shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the board.  Special
meetings shall be called by the chairperson.  Meetings shall be held within the
City limits of Springfield.
 
   (b)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the action of the board and the vote of each member upon
each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of all its official actions, all of which shall be filed properly
in the office of the Community Development Director. The presence of six (6)
members shall constitute a quorum.  The Community Development Director shall
designate a City employee to serve as secretary to the Community Grant Advisory
Board.
 
   (c)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall make such annual and other
reports as may be required by the City Commission.
 
172.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Community Grant Advisory Board shall provide advice and
recommendations to the City Commission regarding the City's community
development and housing needs, shall assist the City Commission in the
formulation of the strategies to address those needs and to assist in the
selection of community development programs and activities funded through the
City and other organizations, and to assist in the development, implementation,
and evaluation of the City's consolidated plan, serve as liaison with local
citizen organizations involved in community development, and perform such other
duties as the City Commission may assign to the Community Grant Advisory Board.
 
   (b)   The powers and duties of the Community Grant Advisory Board are
advisory in nature only and under no circumstances shall the Community Grant
Advisory Board have the power to enter into financial obligations on the part
of the City, or in any way to incur in the liability or obligation on the part
of the City.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 173
Fair Housing Board and Regulations
 
173.01   Declaration of policy.
173.02   Definitions.
173.03   Exemption.
173.04   Prohibited acts.
173.05   Posting of notices.
173.06   Enforcement.
173.07   Complaints.
173.08   Notice.
173.09   Investigation.
173.10   Conciliation.
173.11   Injunctive relief.
173.12   Hearings.
173.13   Hearing decisions.
173.14   Hearing of officer.
173.15   Remedial actions.
173.16   Judicial relief.
173.17   Additional remedies.
173.18   Limitation of jurisdiction.
173.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Housing discrimination--see Ohio R. C. Ch. 4112
 
173.01  DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide, within
constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the City, to assure
that all persons have full and equal opportunity to consider all available
housing for themselves and their families within the City without being
discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry,
handicap, familial status, national origin, or sexual orientation and to
promote a stable, racially integrated community.
(Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
173.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   (a)    "Administrator" means the Director of Community Development.
   (b)   "Board" means the Human Relations Board.
   (c)   "Discriminate" or "discrimination" means to separate or segregate
persons in a particular manner solely or in part because of race, color,
religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national origin, or sexual
orientation; provided that "discriminate" or "discrimination" shall not include
special outreach efforts conducted by or under the authority of units of local
government (including agencies, departments, and commissionsthereof) or non-
profit fair housing corporations or agencies to ensure that persons of minority
groups are fully informed of, and have access to, available dwelling
opportunities in areas of present or prospective majority group concentration,
or to ensure that persons of the majority group are fully informed of and have
access to available dwelling opportunities in areas of present or prospective
minority group concentration.
   (d)   "Covered multi-family dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or
more units if such buildings have one or more elevators, and ground floor units
in other buildings consisting of four or more units.
   (e)   "Dwelling" means a building or structure, or part thereof, used or
designed or intended to be used for residential purposes.
   (f)   "Familial status" means one or more individuals (who have not attained
the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual
or individuals; or
      (2)   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or their person;
      and shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   (g)   "Housing for older persons" means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any State or Federal program that the Secretary of
HUD determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons
(as defined in the State or Federal program); or
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Housing facilities where at least 80 percent of the units in the
housing facility are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older,
except that a newly constructed housing facility for first occupancy after
March 12, 1989, need not comply with this requirement until 25 percent of the
units in such facility are occupied.  Housing satisfies the requirements of
this section even though:
         (A)   On September 13, 1988, under 80 percent of occupied units in the
housing facility are occupied byat least one person 55 years of age or older
per unit, provided that at least 80 percent of the units that are occupied
after September 13, 1988, are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age
or older.
         (B)   There are unoccupied units, provided that at least 80 percent of
the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or
older.
         (C)   There are units occupied by employees of the housing provider
(and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 55 years of age,
provided the employees perform substantial duties directly related to the
management or maintenance of the housing.
         (D)   There are insufficient units occupied by at least one person 55
years of age or older to meet the requirements of this subsection, but the
housing provider:
            (i)   Reserves all unoccupied units for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older until at least 80 percent of the units are
occupied by at least one person who is 55 or older; or
            (ii)    Where application of the 80 percent rule stated in this
subsection (g) results in a fraction of a unit, that unit shall be considered
to be included in the units which must be occupied by at least one person who
is 55 or older.
   (h)   "Lending institution" means any bank, savings and loan association,
insurance company, or other organization or person regularly engaged in the
business of lending money, guaranteeing loans for profit, or otherwise
providing financial assistance or insurance in connection with the purchase,
sale or rental of dwellings.
   (i)   "Person" means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, or fiduciaries.
   (j)   "Purchase" means to obtain a dwelling through a sale.
   (k)   "Real estate agent" means a real estate broker or salesman, or a
limited real estate broker or salesman, as defined in Section 4735.01 of the
Ohio Revised Code.
   (1)   "Rent" or "rental" means to lease, sublease, assign, or otherwise
grant or obtain the right to occupy a dwelling not owned by the occupant in
return for consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
   (m)   "Sale" or "sell" means to convey, exchange, transfer, or assign legal
or equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, a dwelling in return for
consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
   (n)   "Solicit" or "solicitation" means any conduct by a real estate agent,
or an employee or agent thereof, intended to induce the owner of a dwelling
within the City to sell, rent, or list the same for sale or rental.
   (o)   "Unlawful discriminatory practice" means any act prohibited by Section
173.04 of this chapter.
   (p)   "Handicap" means, with respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment; but such term does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
defined in 21 U. S . C. Section 802.
         (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
173.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not:
   (a)   Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or
in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from
giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in
this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as
an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its
members, provided such club does not discriminate in its membership policies on
the basis of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status,
or national origin.  The provisions of this chapter as it pertains to sexual
orientation shall not apply to religious schools, churches engaged in religious
activities and owner-occupied residences with not more than three (3) unrelated
renters.
   (b)   Require any person selling or renting property to modify such property
in any way at his or her expense, provided that such person does not refuse to
permit reasonable modifications by a handicapped person, necessary for that
person to fully enjoy the premises in which he or she resides, when such
modifications are made at the expense of the handicapped person, which
permission may be conditioned on that person's promise to restore the premises
to the condition in which it previously existed before granting permission for
such modification, nor shall this chapter be construed to relieve any
handicapped person of any obligation generally imposed on all persons
regardless of handicap in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract of
purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill
the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of the lease,
agreement, or contract, so long as such distinctions are not based on the
handicap itself, or on the landlord's refusal to make reasonable modification
in the lease, agreement or contract conditions for the purpose of denying a
handicapped person equal opportunity to the use and enjoyment of the premises.
   (c)   Prohibit restricting the sale or rental of a dwelling on the basis of
handicap when such a dwelling is authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized
in whole or in part for the benefit of persons of a handicap by a unit of
state, local, or federal government, so long as such restrictions do not
discriminate against otherwise qualified handicapped persons.
   (d)   Require that a dwelling be made available to a person with a handicap
whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others.
   (e)   Prohibit the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal
restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling.
   (f)   With regard to familial status, apply to dwellings provided under any
state or federal program specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons, as defined in the State or Federal program, or to housing for older
persons, provided that HUD has determined that such program or housing is
exempt, which determination shall be conclusive.
   (g)   Prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of
real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or sexual
orientation.
   (h)   Apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, under the
terms and conditions set forth in 42 U. S. C. Section 3603(b); or to rooms or
units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if
the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his
residence.
   (i)   Prohibit conduct against a person because such person has been
convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or
distribution of a controlled substance as defined in 21 U. S. C. Section 802.
      (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
173.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is hereby declared to be a discriminatory housing practice and unlawful
for any person to:
   (a)   Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, finance,
negotiate, or otherwise deny or make unavailable a dwelling to any person
because of the race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status,
national origin, or sexual orientation of any present or prospective owner,
occupant, or user of such dwelling, or in the case of a handicapped person, an
associate thereof;
   (b)   Represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, sex,
ancestry, handicap, familial status, national origin, or sexual orientation,
that a dwelling is not available for sale, rental, or inspection when in fact
it is available;
   (c)   Refuse to lend money, or to purchase a loan, or to provide other
financial assistance, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of a dwelling
or otherwise withhold financing of a dwelling from any person because of the
race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national
origin, or sexual orientation of any present or dwelling, provided such person
lends money as one of the principal aspects or incident to his principal
business and not only as a part of the purchase price of an owner-occupied
residence he is selling nor merely casually or occasionally to a relative or
friend;
   (d)   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling,
transferring, assigning, brokering, renting, leasing, or subleasing any
dwelling or in furnishing facilities, services, or privileges in connection
with the ownership, occupancy, or use of any dwelling, including the sale of
fire, extended coverage or homeowners insurance, because of the race, color,
religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national origin, or sexual
orientation of any present or prospective owner, occupant, or user of such
dwelling, or in the case of a handicapped person, an associate thereof, or
because of the racial composition of the neighborhood in which the dwelling is
located;
   (e)   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan
of money, purchase of loans, or in a providing other financial assistance,
whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of a dwelling because of
the race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national
origin, or sexual orientation of any present or prospective owner, occupant, or
user of such dwelling, or because of the racial composition of the neighborhood
in which the dwelling is located;
   (f)   Refuse to consider without prejudice the purpose of extending mortgage
credit to a married couple or either member thereof;
   (g)   Print, publish, or circulate any statement or advertisement, or make
any verbal statement, relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental,
lease, sublease, or acquisition of any dwelling or the loan of money, whether
or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of a dwelling which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based upon race,
color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national origin, or
sexual orientation or an intention to make any such preference, limitation,
specification, or discrimination.
   (h)   Include in any transfer, rental, or lease of a dwelling any
restrictive covenant, based on race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap,
familial status, national origin, or sexual orientation or honor or exercise,
or attempt to honor or exercise, any such restrictive covenant, provided that
the prior inclusion of such a restrictive covenant in the chain of title shall
not be deemed a violation of this provision;
   (i)   Induce or solicit or attempt to induce or solicit a dwelling listing,
sale, or transaction by representing that a change has occurred or may occur
with respect to the racial, religious, sexual, or ethnic composition of the
block, neighborhood, or area in which the dwelling is located, or induced or
solicited or attempt to induce or solicit such sale or listing by representing
that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any race, color,
religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status, national origin, or sexual
orientation, in the area will or may have results such as the following:
      (1)   The lowering of property values;
      (2)   A change in the racial, religious, sexual, or ethnic composition of
the block, neighborhood, or area in which the dwelling is located;
      (3)   An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area;
      (4)   A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
   (j)   Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate agents' association, or other service,
association, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing
accommodations, or to discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap, familial status, ancestry, or
sexual orientation;
   (k)   Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person's having exercised or
enjoyed or having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this section;
   (l)   Discourage or attempt to discourage the purchase by a prospective
purchaser of a dwelling, by representing that any block, neighborhood, or area
has undergone or might undergo a change with respect to the religious, racial,
sexual, familial status, or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood, or
area.
   (m)   Discriminate against any person, because of race, color, religion,
sex, national origin, handicap, familial status, ancestry, or sexual
orientation, in appraising the value of any dwelling in connection with the
sale, brokering, or rental of such dwelling.
   (n)   Refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if
such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the
premise, except that, in the case of a rental, no modification need be
permitted unless the renter first agrees to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear
and tear excepted unless previouslynegotiated with the landlord.
   (o)   Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a
handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
   (p)   Construct covered multi-family dwellings that do not provide for
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped persons in compliance
with applicable state or federal law, whichever is controlling.
   (q)   Discriminate in any manner against any other person because that
person has opposed any unlawful practice defined in this chapter, or because
that person has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any
manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing as provided pursuant to
this chapter.
   (r)   Aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any act declared by
this chapter to be an unlawfully discriminatory practice, or to obstruct or
prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this chapter, or any
order issued pursuant thereto, or to attempt directly or indirectly to commit
any act declared by this chapter to be an unlawful discriminatory practice.
      (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
173.05  POSTING OF NOTICES.
   All real estate agents and all persons who operate or manage a dwelling with
more than four (4) dwelling units shall post in a conspicuous location in those
areas of their places of business located within the City where prospective
purchasers, sellers, or renters normally make inquiries, and where the terms of
a sale or rental are normally negotiated, a notice which contains the following
language, printed on a light-colored background, in not less than fourteen-
point type:
 
      "It is a violation of the City of Springfield Fair Housing Law, in
connection with any housing activity, to discriminate against any person
because of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, handicap, familial status,
national origin, or sexual orientation.
 
      For more information, contact: 324-7380"
   (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
173.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The Board shall have the responsibility to administer the provisions
of this chapter and to adjudicate complaints alleging violations of Section
173.04. The Board shall have and may exercise the following powers to implement
the purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   To hold adjudicative hearings, make findings of fact, issue orders,
enforce such orders, and seek judicial and/or administrative relief with
respect to any such complaints in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   To subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths,
take sworn testimony, and, in connection therewith, to require the production
for examination of any documents relating to any matter under investigation or
in question before the Board, and enforce such powers by proper petition to any
court of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   To adopt such rules and regulations as the Board may deem necessary
or desirable for the conduct of its business and to carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
      (4)   To do such other acts as are necessary and proper to perform those
duties with which the Board is charged under this chapter.
 
   (b)   The Administrator shall receive and process complaints on behalf of
the Board.
 
173.07  COMPLAINTS.
   Any person may allege that a violation of Section
173.04 has occurred, or that a violation will occur and cause injury, by filing
with the Board, within one year of the alleged violation, a written complaint
setting forth his grievance. The complaint shall state, on a printed form made
available by the Board, the name and address of the complainant, the name and
address of the person(s) alleged to have committed a violation of Section
173.04 and the particular facts thereof, and such other information as may be
required by the Board. A complaint may be amended at any time. Upon the filing
of a complaint, the Administrator shall acknowledge the receipt of the
complaint, serving notice thereof to the complainant, which notice shall also
contain information as to the time limits and choice of forum provided in this
chapter.
 
173.08  NOTICE.
   Within fifteen (15) days after a complaint has been received by the Board,
the Administrator shall serve, or cause to be served, in person, or by
certified mail, a copy of the complaint on the person (hereinafter referred to
as "respondent") alleged to have violated Section
173.04.  Along with the service of the complaint, the Administrator shall
advise the respondent in writing of his procedural rights and obligations
pursuant to this chapter.  The respondent may file with the Board an answer to
the complaint.
 
173.09  INVESTIGATION.
   Within thirty (30) calendar days after a complaint has been received by the
Board, the Administrator shall conduct an investigation of the complaint and
shall determine either that:
   (a)   There are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of Section
173.04 has occurred, in which case the Administrator shall then initiate the
conciliation process of Section
173.10; or
   (b)   There are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of Section
173.04 has not occurred, in which case the Administrator shall then dismiss the
complaint by preparing a written notice of dismissal, including the reasons
therefor, and notify the parties of the dismissal, within five (5) days, by
serving a copy of the notice of dismissal by certified mail on the parties. A
copy of the notice shall also be filed with the Board. The notice of dismissal
shall advise the complainant of his right of appeal under this section.  Within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of dismissal, the complainant may
appeal by filing a written request with the Board for a review of the
complaint.  By a majority vote, the Board may overrule the dismissal and refer
the complaint to the Administrator for conciliation pursuant to Section
173.10.
   (c)   The Administrator shall complete the investigation within one hundred
(100) days after receipt of the complaint, unless impracticable, in which case
the Administrator shall inform, in writing, the complainant and the respondent
of the reasons why the investigation cannot be completed within the time
prescribed .
173.10  CONCILIATION.
   If the Administrator has made a determination pursuant to Section
173.09 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of Section
173.04 has occurred, or at such other time after a complaint has been filed, as
appropriate, the Administrator shall:
   (a)   Notify the complainant and respondent of the time, place, and date of
the conciliation conference at least ten (10) days prior thereto, and both
parties shall appear at the conciliation conference in person or by attorney;
and
   (b)   Attempt to resolve the complaint by methods of conference,
conciliation, and persuasion with all interested parties and such
representatives as the parties may choose to assist them.  Conciliation
conference shall be informal and nothing said or done during such conferences
shall be made public unless the parties agree thereto in writing. The terms of
conciliation agreed to by the parties shall be reduced to writing and
incorporated into a consent agreement to be signed by the parties, subject to
approval by the Board.  The terms of the conciliation agreement shall be made
public unless the complainant and the respondent agree otherwise, and the Board
determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this
chapter.
   (c)   If the complaint has not been resolved by conciliation within sixty
(60) calendar days after it has been received, the Administrator shall refer
the complaint to the Board for an adjudicative hearing.
173.11  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   At any time after the filing of a complaint, the Administrator may request
the Director of Law to petition the appropriate court for temporary or
preliminary relief pending final determination of the proceedings under this
chapter, or as otherwise necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter,
including any order or decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing
any action which would render ineffectual any order or action by the Board.
 
173.12  HEARINGS.
   Within thirty (30) calendar days after the complaint is referred to the
Board, the Board shall, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties, conduct
a hearing on the complaint. Parties to the hearing shall be the complainant and
respondent, and such other persons as the Board may deem appropriate. The
hearing shall be open to the public. At least seven (7) days before the
hearing, the Board shall serve upon the respondent a statement of charges and a
summons requiring the attendance of named persons and the production of
relevant documents and records. The parties may apply to the Board to have
subpoenas issued in the Board's name. Failure to comply with a summons or
subpoena shall constitute a violation of this chapter.  The parties may file
such statements with the Board as they deem necessary. No fewer than three (3)
of the same members of the Board must be present at all times during a hearing.
The parties may appear before the Board in person or by duly authorized
representative, and may be represented by legal counsel. The parties shall have
the right to present witnesses and cross-examine witnesses, and all testimony
and evidence shall be given under oath or by affirmation.
 
173.13  HEARING DECISIONS.
   Where hearings have been held before the Board, only those members of the
Board who have attended all hearings on the complaint shall participate in the
determination of the complaint. Within fifteen (15) days of the close of the
hearing, the decision shall be rendered in the form of a written order which
shall include findings of fact, a statement of whether the respondent has
violated Section
173.04, and such remedial actions as the Board may order pursuant to Section
173.15. The order shall be served upon the parties by certified mail
withinfifteen (15) days of the date of the decision. The order shall be
available for public inspection, and a copy shall be provided to any person
upon request and payment of production costs.
 
173.14  HEARING OFFICER.
   The Board, in lieu of conducting a hearing upon complaint, may appoint a
hearing officer for the purpose of conducting hearings and reporting the finds
thereof to the Board.  In conducting such hearings, the hearing officer shall
be delegated all powers conferred upon the Board pursuant to this chapter as to
subpoenaing witnesses, compelling their attendance, administering oaths, taking
sworn testimony, and requiring the production for examination of any documents
relating to any matter under investigation or question before the Board. Notice
of hearing and the procedures therefor shall be in accordance with Section
173.12 of this chapter. After the conclusion of any hearing, the hearing
officer shall report these finds to the Board within seven (7) days. Within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the finds of the hearing officer, the Board
shall render its decision in accordance with Section
173.13 of this chapter.
 
173.15  REMEDIAL ACTIONS.
   (a)   If the Board finds that the respondent has not violated Section
173.04, its order under Section
173.13 shall dismiss the complaint.
 
   (b)   If the Board finds that the respondent has violated Section
173.04, its order under Section
173.13 shall provide for the taking of such remedial action(s) as it deems
appropriate, which may include, but need not be limited to:
      (1)   Directing the respondent to cease and desist from violations of
Section
173.04 and to take such affirmative steps as necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Initiating, at the Board's expense, an appropriate court action for
the enforcement of Section
173.04, and for such other or further relief as the court may deem appropriate,
including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, compensatory damages,
punitive damages, and/or attorneys' fees and costs for award to the
complainant; such court action shall be required in the event the respondent
does not voluntarily comply with remedial actions ordered by the Board.
      (3)   Initiating proceedings for violation of federal or state law and/or
regulations.
      (4)   Initiating proceedings with any contracting agency, in the case of
any violation of Section
173.04 by respondent in the course of performing under a contract or
subcontract with the State or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or
with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, for
the purpose of causing a termination of such contract or any portion thereof,
or obtaining other relief.
      (5)   Initiating proceedings with the State of Ohio where applicable, to
revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew the license of any person found to have
violated any provision of Section
173.04.
      (6)   Directing the respondent to reimburse the complainant for his
actual and reasonable expenses incurred and to be incurred as a result of each
violation found including, but not limited to, expenses for moving and
temporary storage of household furnishings, additional expenses in connection
with the purchase or rental of a dwelling for alternative accommodations, and
reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
      (7)   Assessing compensatory damages, as appropriate, or arrange to have
adjudicated in court at the Board's expense the award of compensatory damages
against the respondent.
      (8)   Assessing civil penalties, as appropriate, or arrange to have
adjudicated in court at the Board's expense the award of a civil penalty
against the respondent.
      (9)   Directing the respondent to comply with such other further relief
as the Board may deem appropriate for the enforcement of Section
173.04.
 
   (c)   The Board shall make a final administrative disposition of a complaint
within one (1) year after the complaint has been filed, unless it is
impracticable to do so, in which case the complainant and the respondent shall
be notified in writing of the reasons why disposition of the complaint cannot
be made within the time prescribed.
 
   (d)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Board, at its own
expense, from initiating appropriate court action on behalf of the complainant
in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter.  In addition, upon a
finding by the Administrator that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
a violation of Section
173.04 has occurred, as provided in Section
173.09, either the complainant or the respondent, in lieu of participating in
the administrative hearing process before the Board, or at any time during said
administrative process, may elect to have the case heard in a civil action. 
Upon notification thereof, the Board, at its expense, shall initiate a civil
action in a court of law on behalf of the complainant.
 
   (e)   The complainant and the respondent shall have the right to appeal in
adverse final determination by the Board to the Clark County Common Pleas Court
pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Chapter 2506, or in such other forum or court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by law.
 
173.16  JUDICIAL RELIEF.
   The City, or the complainant, or any person aggrieved by a violation of any
provision of this chapter may, at any time within one (1) year from the date of
the alleged violation, and in lieu of proceeding with the administrative
process set forth in this chapter, apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for appropriate relief including, but not limited to:
   (a)   Injunctive relief or an order otherwise compelling compliance with
this chapter;
   (b)   Compensatory damages, and/or punitive damages;
   (c)   Reasonable attorneys' fees and costs provided that said complainant,
in the opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume said attorneys'
fees; and/or
   (d)   Such other or further relief as is appropriate for the enforcement of
this chapter and the elimination of violations thereof.
173.17  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   This chapter shall not prevent the City or any person from exercising any
right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled,
or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law or equity.
 
173.18  LIMITATION OF JURISDICTION.
   The Human Relations Board shall have no authority to entertain any complaint
originating outside the physical boundaries of the City.
 
173.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who fails to comply with the subpoena issued by the Human
Relations Board is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
 
   (b)   Any person who fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of
any conciliation consent agreement entered into or order issued by the Board
pursuant to Section
173.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 174
ADA Transportation Advisory Committee
 
174.01   Creation; members; terms; vacancy.
174.02   Officers; meetings; records; quorum; reports.
174.03   Powers and duties.
 
174.01  CREATION; MEMBERS; TERMS; VACANCY.
   (a)   The ADA Transportation Advisory Committee shall consist of eleven
voting members and three non-voting members.  Each of the members shall serve
for a period of three years and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent and approval of the City Commission.  Of the eleven voting members,
three members shall be affiliates of social service organizations who serve
disabled persons, two shall be representatives from transportation providers
within the City, and the remaining six voting members shall be electors of the
City at least four of which shall be disabled persons.  Of the three non-voting
members, one shall be a City Commissioner, one shall be a staff member of the
Springfield-Clark County Transportation Coordinating Committee, and one shall
be the City's Transportation Coordinator.  No members of the committee, with
the exception of the two representatives from transportation providers, the
appointee of the Springfield-Clark County Transportation Coordinating
Committee, and the City's Transportation Coordinator, shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.  After a member has served during two consecutive terms, he
shall be ineligible for reappointment to the committee until one year has
expired since his last date of service on the committee.
 
   (b)   Any vacancy on the committee shall be filed as in the case of the
original appointment, as set forth herein, for the unexpired term of the member
whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (c)   All members of the committee shall serve without compensation and
shall be subject to removal from office by a majority vote of the City
Commission.
 
   (d)   Persons eligible for service on the committee shall meet the following
qualifications, in addition to any qualifications described in Subsection
174.01(a):
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
174.01(a), persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the committee.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
174.01(a), elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
committee. A member of a City employee’s family, as defined in Section
111.04, shall not be eligible for service.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, if any member of the
committee fails to meet any of the qualifications stated in Subsection (d)(1)
and (2) hereof, the office shall immediately become vacant.
      (4)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the
committee, may waive any or all of the requirements of Subsection (d)(1) hereof
for such appointee or member.
 
   (e)   If any member of the committee is absent from three of any six
consecutive regular, monthly meetings, or if such member is unwilling or unable
to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public business
of his board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum, is
office shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity
to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a
majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance of his term.
(Ord. 95-96.  Passed 3-14-95.)             
 
174.02  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RECORDS; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   (a)   The committee shall elect from its membership a chairperson and such
other officers as it may deem necessary.  No chairperson shall serve more than
two years of a period of six consecutive years.  The term "year" means twelve
consecutive months.  The committee shall adopt rules and regulations consistent
with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the committee shall be held one each
quarter, and at such additional times as the committee may determine; provided,
however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member has proposed
business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular meetings shall be
specified in the rules and regulations of the committee.  Special meetings
shall be called by the chairperson.  There shall be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
action of the committee and the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all
of its official action, and all of which shall be filed promptly in the office
of the City Clerk.  The presence of six voting members shall constitute a
quorum.  The committee shall act by resolution and a copy of each resolution
duly adopted shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.  The
Transportation Coordinator or his duly authorized representative shall serve as
secretary to the committee.
 
   (c)   The secretary shall make such annual and other reports as may be
required by the City Commission.
 
174.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Without limitation on the general powers or authority necessary or
incidental to the purposes for which the committee is appointed, the duties of
the committee shall be to study matters affecting and concerning public
transportation available to disabled persons within the City and to make
recommendations and to advise the City Commission, the Springfield/Clark County
Transportation Coordinating Committee and local transit agencies from time to
time on policy matters, public facilities, transportation equipment and
transportation programs intended to provide service to disabled persons in the
City.  The committee shall study such other matters as the City Manager or the
City Commission may designate from time to time.
   The powers and duties of the committee are advisory in nature only and under
no circumstances shall the committee have the power to enter into financial
obligations on the part of the City or in any way to incur any liability or
obligation on the part of the City.
(Ord. 92-118.  Passed 4-14-92.)
 
 
 
TITLE NINE - Employment Provisions
Chap.
175.  Employee Classification Compensation Plan.
Chap.
185.  Fringe Benefits.
Chap.
187.  Fidelity Bonds.
Chap.
188.  Police Division.
Chap.
189.  Promotional Examinations for Police and Fire Divisions.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 175
Employee Classification Compensation Plan
 
175.01   Establishment of Plan.
175.02   Collective bargaining agreements.
175.03   Development and maintenance of salary ranges.
175.04   Salary ranges.
175.05   Transfers, promotions and demotions.
175.06   Salary decreases.
175.07   Part-time employees.
175.08   Conformity to Federal law.
175.09   Composition of Plan.
175.10   Class title.
175.11   Class specifications.
175.12   Use of Plan.
175.13   Maintenance of Plan.
175.14   Allocation appeals.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Worker's Compensation - see Ohio Const., Art. II, Sec. 35; Ohio R.C. Ch. 4123
Wages and hours on public works - see Ohio Const., Art. II, Sec. 37; Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4115
 
175.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAN.
   (a)   The City Manager shall, by administrative regulation recorded in his
City Manager's Journal, develop, establish and maintain an Employee
Classification Plan which shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
 
   (b)   The Plan shall include the basic salary schedule and the schedule of
salary ranges, consisting of minimum and maximum rates of pay and intermediate
steps for all classes of positions included in the City Employee Classification
Plan as established by the City Manager.
 
   (c)   The Plan shall provide a complete inventory of all positions in the
City service and descriptions and specifications for each class of employment. 
In the Plan, titles shall be standardized and each of them shall be indicative
of a definite range of duties and responsibilities and shall have the same
meanings throughout the City service.
 
   (d)   In the event of a conflict between any section in Title Nine of this
Part One - Administrative Code and a provision contained in a collective
bargaining agreement entered into by the City and its employees, the provision
contained in such collective bargaining provision shall prevail.
 
   (e)   The Plan shall be developed, established and maintained in such a
manner so as not to frustrate or circumvent the independence of operation of
the Finance and Law Departments and the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.02  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.
   Collective bargaining agreements shall not become effective until approved
by an ordinance enacted by the City Commission.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.03  DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF SALARY RANGES.
   (a)   Salary ranges shall be linked directly to the Plan of position
classifications and shall be determined with due regard to ranges of pay of
other classes, relative particular occupational categories, prevailing rates
for similar employment in private establishments in the City area, rates of pay
in other jurisdictions, the financial policies of the City and other economic
considerations.  The minimum and maximum and intermediate steps of each salary
range shall be those rates in the basic salary schedule which most nearly
reflect these factors.
 
   (b)   Prior to the preparation of each annual budget, as well as at other
appropriate times, the City Manager may make or direct to be made, such
comparative studies as he may deem necessary, of the factors affecting the
level of salary ranges.  On the basis of information derived from such studies,
the City Manager shall adopt such changes in the salary ranges as are pertinent
to maintaining the fairness and adequacy of the Plan.  The rate of pay for each
employee shall be adjusted to the appropriate step in conformation with the
adjustment of the salary range for the class.
 
   (c)   General salary increases affecting all City employees shall not become
effective until approved by an ordinance enacted by the City Commission.
 
   (d)   At sometime during the first quarter of each even numbered year the
City Manager shall provide the City Commission with a review and report on the
City's then current Employee Classification Compensation Plan. 
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.04  SALARY RANGES.
   The salary ranges are intended to furnish administrative flexibility in
recognizing individual differences between positions allocated to the same
class, in providing employee incentives and rewarding employees for meritorious
service.
 
   The following shall be the general policy with respect to the use of the pay
steps within salary ranges:
   (a)   The minimum rate of pay for a class shall be paid to any person on his
original appointment to a position of a class except when, as determined by the
department head and approved by the City Manager, the new employee possesses
exceptional qualifications warranting employment at a higher rate in the pay
range.
   (b)   Within-range increases shall be from one pay step to the next higher
step, every twelve months, to Step F:  provided, however, that in extraordinary
circumstances applicable to the particular employee and documented in summary
form, the City Manager may permit increases of one or more steps and may grant
such increases in less than twelve months.  However, each such increase shall
not be automatic, but shall be based upon merit and shall be specifically
recommended by the department head and approved by the City Manager; and
provided further that all within-range adjustments are subject to the
availability of funds as determined by the City Commission.  Salary increases
or decreases resulting from the adjustments of salary ranges in accordance with
Section
175.03 shall not prevent within-range increases in accordance with this
section.  All employees on the City's payroll as of December 31, 1992, shall
have their performance reviewed for the purpose of determining whether a
within-range increase shall be granted nine months after their most recent 
performance evaluation, for the first such review after January 1, 1993. 
Thereafter, all subsequent reviews will follow at twelve-month intervals, as
set forth in this paragraph (b). 
      (Ord. 92-398.  Passed 12-28-92.)
 
175.05  TRANSFERS, PROMOTIONS AND DEMOTIONS.
   When an employee is transferred, promoted or demoted, his/her rate of pay
for the new position shall be determined as follows:
   (a)   Transfers.  An employee transferred, to another position in the same
class shall continue to receive the same pay rate until he/she is promoted or
demoted or until his/her rate is adjusted in accordance with the provisions of
Sections
175.03 and
175.04.
   (b)   Promotions.  An employee promoted to a position in any class having a
higher pay range shall receive a salary increase as follows:
      (1)   If his/her rate of pay in the lower class does not fall within the
range of pay in the higher class, his/her rate of pay shall be increased to the
minimum rate for the higher class.
      (2)   If his/her rate of pay in the lower class falls within the range of
pay for the higher class, the employee shall be advanced to the next higher
step.
      (3)   If the rate of pay of the employee in the lower class is higher
than the maximum rate of pay in the higher class, he/she shall receive no
salary increase on promotion.
      (4)   If upon or after the promotion of any employee, the City Manager
determines that the increase of compensation payable to such employee
occasioned by such promotion is not sufficient to afford adequate compensation
for any additional duties and responsibilities imposed as a result of such
promotion, the City Manager may direct that such employee be advanced to the
next higher step of the appropriate salary range.
   (c)   Demotions.  An employee demoted from a position in one class to
another having a lower pay range shall receive a salary decrease of not less
than one step.  A one step decrease shall mean the following:
      (1)   If the rate of pay of the employee in a higher class is above the
maximum salary for the lower class, his/her rate of pay shall be decreased to
the maximum rate of the lower class, unless the decrease shall be less than one
step, in which case his/her pay shall be reduced to the next lower step in the
pay range.
      (2)   If the rate of pay of the employee in the higher class is within
the pay range of the lower class, his/her rate of pay shall be decreased by one
pay step.
         (Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.06  SALARY DECREASES.
   The City Manager for just causes may reduce the salary of an employee within
the pay range prescribed for the class.  Notice of intention to effect such a
reduction in pay and the reasons for such action shall be given to the
employee, and the department head, ten days prior to the effective date of the
reduction.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.07  PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   All employees of the City who are hired on a part-time basis shall be paid
hourly for the work performed for the City in accordance with the appropriate
classification of the position to which the employee has been assigned and in
proportion to the amount stated in the basic salary schedule.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.08  CONFORMITY TO FEDERAL LAW.
   Notwithstanding any provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City, the
provisions of the United States Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 as amended
shall apply and control on matters, at minimum wages and overtime where such
provisions are made applicable to the City by such Act.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.09  COMPOSITION OF PLAN.
   The Plan shall be comprised of:
   (a)   An assembly into classes of positions which are of approximately
equivalent difficulty and responsibility, which may be appropriately filled
with persons possessing the same general qualifications, and for which
equitable compensation can be paid under similar working conditions from the
same pay range;
   (b)   A class title, descriptive of the work of each class, which shall
identify each class and which shall be coded by number for personnel control
and payroll accounting purposes;
   (c)   Written class specifications for each class of positions containing a
description of the nature of the work and of the relative responsibility of the
positions in the class, examples of work which are illustrative of the duties
of the positions assigned to the class, requirements of work in terms of
knowledge, abilities and skills necessary for the performance of the work, and
a statement of experience and training desirable for recruitment into the
class; and
   (d)   An allocation list showing the class title of each position in the
City service, as identified by the name of the employee holding such position. 
The Plan shall be set up to reflect positions by major groupings of allied
positions such as clerical, administrative, fiscal, engineering and technical;
and each grouping shall have an identifying code number bracket.
      (Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.10  CLASS TITLE.
   Class titles or designated code symbols, shall be used in all personnel,
accounting, budgeting payroll, appropriation and financial records.  No person
shall be appointed to, or employed in a position in the City under a title not
included in the Plan.  Titles used in the course of departmental routine to
indicate level of authority or administrative rank may continue to be used for
such purposes.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.11  CLASS SPECIFICATIONS.
   The specifications of the classes of positions in the Plan and their various
parts shall be used as a guide in the classification of positions and have the
following force and effect:
   (a)   The specifications are descriptive and not restrictive.  They are
intended to indicate the kinds of positions that are allocated to the several
classes, as determined by their duties and responsibilities, and shall not be
construed as declaring to any extent, or in any way, what the minimum or
maximum duties or responsibilities of any position shall be, or as limiting or
in any way modifying the power of any appointing authority or administrative
officer to assign, direct and control the work of employees under his
supervision.  The use of particular expression or illustration shall not be
held to exclude others not mentioned that are of similar kind and quality;
   (b)   In determining the class to which any position should be allocated,
the specification of each class shall be considered as a whole.  Consideration
shall be given to the duties, specific tasks, responsibilities, qualification
requirements and relationships to other classes as together affording a
statement of the employment that the class is intended to embrace;
   (c)   Qualifications commonly required of all incumbents of the different
classes, such as acceptable physical condition, freedom from disabling defects,
United States citizenship, suitable age, honesty, sobriety and industry shall
be deemed to be implied as qualification requirements for entrance to each
class even though they may not be specifically mentioned in the specifications.
      (Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.12  USE OF PLAN.
   The Plan shall be used:
   (a)   In preparing public announcements of examinations or vacancies;
   (b)   As a guide in preparing examinations which may be used to appraise the
qualifications of applicants for work in specific classes;
   (c)   In determining promotional sequence and developing employee training
programs;
   (d)   In determining salaries to be paid for various types of work and
establishing and maintaining an equitable compensation plan;
   (e)   In determining personal service items in the budgets for the various
organizational units of the City government;
   (f)   In providing uniform job terminology which is clearly understandable
to City officers, employees and the general public; and
   (g)   In setting up appropriate employment lists from which personnel may be
certified to fill vacancies.
      (Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.13  MAINTENANCE OF PLAN.
   The City Manager shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of the Plan
so that it shall reflect continuously on a current basis, the duties being
performed by each employee in the City and the class to which each position is
allocated.
   The City Manager shall make necessary amendments to the Plan, including the
addition of required new classes, revision of existing classes and deletion of
obsolete classes.  Changes and reallocations within the Plan shall be made as
follows:
   (a)   The City Manager shall analyze or cause to be analyzed the duties and
responsibilities to be assumed by incumbents of proposed new positions and
using such appraisal as a basis, assign the position to the appropriate class
within the Plan if such class already exists.  A new class specification shall
be prepared to cover each additional new position which is created and for
which the Plan does not provide a satisfactory job description;
   (b)   Changes in the duties and responsibilities of a position involving
either the addition, reduction or modification of assignments shall be reported
to the City Manager by the department head concerned.  If the changes are
determined to be permanent and are sufficiently significant to justify
reallocation to a different classification, the City Manager shall assign the
position to the class which is appropriate under the modified circumstances;
provided, however, that the effective date of such different classification
may, at the option of the City Manager, be made retroactive up to the time when
such change in duties and responsibilities of the position effected was
reported to him;
   (c)   The City Manager shall periodically review or cause to be reviewed,
the classification of positions and audit duties and responsibilities and on
the basis of his appraisal, make such changes as are necessary to keep the Plan
up to date and in step with current conditions.
   Reallocations of positions under the provisions of this section shall be the
responsibility of the City Manager, but he shall give due consideration to the
recommendations of the administrative officials concerned.
(Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
175.14  ALLOCATION APPEALS.
   If an employee believes his position has been improperly allocated or
reallocated to a class, he may appeal to a Review Panel consisting of the
Finance Director, City Manager and Law Director, or their designees. 
Department heads shall also have the right to appeal any changes made to the
Compensation Plan which affect their department.  The procedure for such
appeals shall be as follows:
   (a)   A written appeal shall be prepared in duplicate on forms provided by
the City Manager;
   (b)   The appeal shall set forth the reasons therefor;
   (c)   The appellant shall file the original of the appeal with the City
Manager and the copy with the Law Director;
   (d)   The Review Panel shall consider all such appeals and shall provide
reasonable opportunity for each appellant to be heard;
   (e)   The Review Panel shall notify, in writing, the appellant of its
decision.  Any decision of the Review Panel, under this provision, which
allocates a position of an employee to a different class in the Employee
Classification Plan shall be retroactive to the date the appeal was filed.
      (Ord. 90-688.  Passed 12-18-90.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 185
Fringe Benefits
 
(Entire Chapter
185 amended by Ordinance No. 06-426, passed December 5, 2006)
 
185.01   Employee defined.
185.02   Holidays.
185.03   Holiday paid leave of absence; exceptions.
185.04   Work on holidays.
185.05   Holiday leave payment.
185.06   Vacation leave.
185.07   Calculating vacation leave.
185.08   Use of vacation.
185.09   Unused vacation.
185.10   Sick leave accrual.
185.11   Sick leave usage.
185.12   Donation of sick leave.
185.13   Unused sick leave.
185.14   Transfer of unused sick leave.
185.15   Sick leave rules.
185.16   Injury leave.
185.17   Longevity payment.
185.18   Longevity administration rules.
185.19   Personal days.
185.20   Other paid leave.
185.21   Overtime.
185.22   Compensatory time.
185.23   Shift differential.
185.24   License bonus.
185.25   Uniform allowance.
185.26   Medical insurance.
185.27   Dental insurance.
185.28   Life insurance.
185.29   Residency.
185.30   Tuition reimbursement.
185.31   Grievance procedure.
185.32   Benefits for permanent part-time employees.
 
185.01  EMPLOYEE DEFINED.
   “Employee” as used in this Chapter
185 means a person appointed to a permanent position of employment with The
City of Springfield, Ohio, except:
   (a)   persons holding position within bargaining units certified by the
State Employment Relations Board,
   (b)   persons subject to individual employment agreements,
   (c)   elected officials, and
   (d)   persons employed by the Clark County Municipal Court through
appointment by the judge(s) and clerk of the Clark County Municipal Court.
 
185.02  HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   The following days of each year shall be observed as holidays for all
employees:
      (1)   January 1--New Year's Day
      (2)   Martin Luther King Day--third Monday in January
      (3)   Presidents Day--third Monday in February
      (4)   Memorial Day--last Monday in May
      (5)   Independence Day--July 4th
      (6)   Labor Day--first Monday in September
      (7)   Veterans' Day--November 11th
      (8)   Thanksgiving Day--last or next to last Thursday in November
      (9)   Day after Thanksgiving
      (10)   Christmas Eve--last work day before Christmas
      (11)   Christmas Day--December 25th
      (12)   Employee's Birthday
   In the event any of the above mentioned holidays falls on a Saturday, the
same shall be observed on the preceding day; if any of the above mentioned
holidays falls on a Sunday, the same shall be observed on the succeeding day. 
The term holiday as used in this chapter will apply to the preceding or
succeeding day of observance.
 
   (b)   Holidays may not be accumulated beyond the calendar year in which they
occur.
 
   (c)   The birthday holiday may be used anytime throughout the calendar year
in which the birthdate occurs provided that the employee was or is actually
employed on such birthdate.  Any employee who terminates his or her service
with the City prior to his or her birthdate, having used the birthday holiday,
shall have deducted from any final compensation due an amount reflecting the
prior payment for such birthday holiday.  Birthday holidays must be used during
the calendar year in which the birthdate occurs and cannot be carried over for
use in any subsequent calendar year.
 
   (d)   Holidays that have occurred for which an employee has not been paid
shall, upon leaving City employment for any reason, be paid for those holidays
which have occurred during the calendar year.
 
185.03  HOLIDAY PAID LEAVE OF ABSENCE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Each full time employee shall be entitled to leave of absence with pay
on each of the holidays listed in Section
185.02.  Payment for each holiday shall be equivalent to one day’s regular pay,
provided that such employee shall have worked or have been in approved leave
status on the employee’s regular work days immediately preceding and
immediately following the holiday.
 
   (b)   Employees whose regular schedule of work includes work on holidays,
shall work on holidays pursuant to that schedule and shall be granted a
substitute day off with pay to be scheduled with approval of the employee’s
manager.
 
185.04  WORK ON HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   An employee compensated on an hourly basis, who is required to work on
a holiday, shall be paid at twice the employee’s regular hourly rate for actual
time worked on the holiday, rounded to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) hour,
provided such work has been authorized and directed by management. 
Authorization after the fact will only be granted in cases of extraordinary
emergency.
 
   (b)   No overtime will be paid for work on the Employee’s birthday holiday.
 
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) above, in the event
that a person or organization schedules a conference or training program on a
holiday, and the City Manager or his designee determines that the conference or
training program would be beneficial to the operations of the City, any
employee attending such a program will not be paid pursuant to paragraph (a),
but instead will receive their regular rate of pay for such holiday and one
additional day off with pay.  Such additional day shall be taken at a time
approved by the director of the department in which the person is employed with
due regard to the preference of such employee consistent with efficient
operation.
 
185.05  HOLIDAY LEAVE PAYMENT.
   (b)   Each Assistant Chief within the Fire Division, following written
notification to the Chief of the Fire Division, may elect to receive a cash
payment in lieu of all or part of his paid annual holidays for five (5)
consecutive calendar years within the six (6) calendar years immediately prior
to service retirement eligibility.  Such employees who elect to exercise this
provision shall be paid for any remaining unused holidays for which he is
entitled at the straight-time rate in effect at the end of the last full pay
period of the relevant year.  Such payment shall be made in January following
the calendar year in which the holidays were unused.
 
   (b)   Each Captain within the Police Division, following written
notification to the Chief of the Police Division, may elect to receive a cash
payment in lieu of all or part of his paid annual holidays for five (5)
consecutive calendar years within the six (6) calendar years immediately prior
to service retirement eligibility.  Such employees who elect to exercise this
provision shall be paid for any remaining unused holidays for which he is
entitled at the straight-time rate in effect at the end of the last full pay
period of the relevant year.  Such payment shall be made in January following
the calendar year in which the holidays were unused.
(Ord. 20-83. Passed 3-24-2020.)
 
185.06  VACATION LEAVE.
   (a)   Full time employees of the City hired before May 31, 2006, except
Captains in the Police Division, shall accrue vacation leave in accordance with
the following schedule:
 
Length of Employment      Vacation Accrual Rate
Upon completion of 6 mos. 24 hrs
After 6 mos.              1.23 hrs / pay period
After 1 year              4 hrs / pay period
After 4 years             4.92 hrs / pay period
After 9 years             5.54 hrs / pay period
After 14 years            6.46 hrs / pay period
After 19 years            7.08 hrs / pay period
After 24 years            7.69 hrs / pay period
After 29 years            8.62 hrs / pay period
   (b)   Captains in the Police Division hired before May 31, 2006, shall
accrue vacation in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Length of Employment  Vacation Accrual Rate
During the first year 3.69 hrs / pay period
After 1 year          4.31 hrs / pay period
After 4 years         5.23 hrs / pay period
After 9 years         5.85 hrs / pay period
After 14 years        6.77 hrs / pay period
After 19 years        8.0 hrs / pay period
   (c)   Full time employees of the City, hired on or after May 31, 2006 shall
accrue vacation leave in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Length of Employment      Vacation Accrual Rate
Upon completion of 6 mos. 24 hrs
After 6 mos.              1.23 hrs / pay period
After 1 year              3.08 hrs / pay period
After 5 years             4.62 hrs / pay period
After 10 years            6.16 hrs / pay period
   (d)   The above accrual schedules presume that the employee is in paid
status for 80 hours in the pay period.  Vacation accrual will be prorated for
any pay period in which the employee is in paid status less than 80 hours.
185.07  CALCULATING VACATION LEAVE.
   (a)   In calculating length of employment under Section
185.06, an employee shall be credited with prior period(s) of employment with
the City.
   (b)   Employees who were credited with service with another public employer
under prior ordinances shall continue to receive such credit, but no employee
hired after the effective date of this ordinance shall receive such credit.
   (c)   In determining length of employment under Section
185.06, an employee shall be credited with military service in addition to
service with the City, provided the employee entered military service directly
from City employment and returned to City service immediately following
completion of the military service.
185.08  USE OF VACATION.
   An employee may use vacation to obtain absence with pay.  The time scheduled
for use of vacation leave shall be approved by management in accordance with
policies established by the City Manager.
185.09  UNUSED VACATION.
   (a)   Employees may carry over from one calendar year to the next, accrued
and unused vacation leave up to a maximum of 320 hours.  Vacation leave accrued
and unused in excess of this limitation shall be cancelled at year end.  With
the written approval of the City Manager, an employee may exceed the maximum
limitation only at the end of the year preceding the employee’s intended
retirement.
   (b)   Upon termination of employment, an employee shall receive an amount
equal to the employee’s accrued unused vacation leave hours multiplied by the
employee’s regular hourly rate.  The regular hourly rate of a salaried employee
shall be calculated by dividing the employee’s annual salary by 2080.
   (c)   Upon layoff, an employee shall have the option to be paid for accrued
and unused vacation time up to the date of layoff in the manner described in
the preceding paragraph.  An employee desiring to exercise such option shall do
so in writing directed to the City prior to the effective date of the layoff. 
In the event that an employee is on layoff status for a period of one
continuous year, payment of accrued, unused vacation time to such an employee
shall be made in conformity with subsection (b) hereof. 
185.10  SICK LEAVE ACCRUAL.
   Each full time employee shall accrue sick leave at the rate of .0575 hours
for each hour in paid status.  Salaried employees shall accrue sick leave at
the rate of 4.6 hours per pay period.
185.11  SICK LEAVE USAGE.
   (a)   Sick leave shall be used to continue the employee’s regular pay when
the employee is unable to work for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The medical condition of the employee,
      (2)   The medical condition of a member of the employee’s immediate
family residing with the employee such as to require the personal care and
attendance of the employee,
      (3)   To attend scheduled appointments for medical or dental examinations
or treatments of the employees, or
      (4)   To make arrangements for and attend a funeral of a member of the
employee’s immediate family.
 
   (b)   For the purpose of this Section
185.11 “immediate family” means the employee’s spouse, parent, step-parent,
child, step-child, sibling, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, and also
includes other relatives who reside with the employee.
185.12  DONATION OF SICK LEAVE.
   An employee who has a sick leave balance in excess of 300 hours may donate
hours in excess of 300 to another employee who is an eligible donee.  An
eligible donee is another employee who is terminally ill (as determined by a
licensed physician) who has exhausted all accumulated paid leave.  The City
Manager shall establish rules and procedures for donation of sick leave.
185.13  UNUSED SICK LEAVE.
   (a)   An employee who retires or otherwise terminates employment in any
manner except by discharge for cause or death and who on such termination date
has been in the employ of the City of Springfield for a period of ten years or
more, having accumulated over 300 hours of sick leave, shall be paid sixty two
and one-half percent (62.5%) for all accumulated sick leave in excess of 300
hours. 
 
   (b)   An employee who is laid off and who has accumulated over 300 hours of
sick leave and has been in the employ of the City for a period of ten years or
more, shall have the option of receiving the payment for unused sick leave
authorized in subsection (a) hereof.  Such option may be exercised at any time
after notice of layoff to such employee who has been given but no later than
the time when such employee ceases to be laid off and in no event later than
one continuous year after layoff status commences.  An employee shall do so by
submitting a written request therefor.
 
   (c)   Payment for unused sick leave shall be made at the employee’s regular
hourly rate in effect on the date of termination of employment or layoff, as
the case may be.  An employee electing to receive payment for unused sick leave
pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall have his accumulated
sick hour balance cancelled.
 
   (d)   An employee who leaves the employ of the City for a position with a
qualifying governmental agency, as defined and provided for by the Ohio Revised
Code, and who satisfies the requirements of subsection (a) hereof may elect to
be paid for a portion of their accumulated sick leave as provided for in
subsection (a) hereof and transfer the remaining portion in excess of the
minimum accumulation (300 hours) and excluding those hours used to calculate a
partial pay-out under this section to such qualifying governmental agency at
the rate of one hundred percent (100%); subject to the limitations of State law
and the policies of the entity to which the employee transfers.  An employee
wishing to exercise this option shall do so by submitting a written request
therefor to the Director of Finance and Personnel Director no later than two
weeks prior to such transfer.
 
   (e)   An employee who dies while employed by the City, and who has been in
the employ of the City of Springfield for a period of ten years or more as of
the date of death, shall have paid to his/her estate one-hundred percent (100%)
of all accumulated sick leave hours.  The rate utilized to calculate such
payment shall be the regular hourly rate in effect for the employee at the time
of death. 
 
   (f)   An employee who shall become disabled, apply for and be found to be
eligible for disability retirement under the provisions of Ohio law, shall use
all accumulated sick leave prior to going on disability retirement.  However,
in the event the City should find it necessary to declare any such person's
position vacant or for other reason except discharge for cause find it
necessary to terminate an employee who is going on disability retirement before
the employee has exhausted his accumulated sick leave, then in such event the
employee shall be paid one hundred percent (100%) of any accumulated sick leave
which he/she has been unable to use. 
 
   (g)  The accumulated hours referred to in subsection (a), (b), (d), (e) and
(f) hereof must be hours accumulated with the City and not transferred in from
another agency.  In making this calculation, the City shall subtract the number
of hours transferred in by the employee under Section
185.14.
 
185.14  TRANSFER OF UNUSED SICK LEAVE.
   Unused sick leave accumulated in the service of a public agency other than
this City, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 124.38, shall be credited to any such employee
transferring from such public agency to the employment of the City up to a
maximum of 300 hours.
 
185.15  SICK LEAVE RULES.
   The City Manager shall establish rules and procedures for the administration
of sick leave benefits.  Such rules may include methods of verifying the
legitimacy of sick leave usage, and the reporting and recording of sick leave
usage.
 
185.16  INJURY LEAVE.
   (a)   When an employee sustains an injury on duty and acting nonnegligently
in the line of duty, the employee shall make application for and actively
prosecute claims under the Workers' Compensation laws of Ohio.
   Such employee may file a request for injury leave with the City.  Such
application shall assign to the City all wage loss benefits which the employee
may receive through the Workers' Compensation laws for any period of time
during which the employee is receiving injury leave benefits from the City.
   If an employee refuses to make such assignment, such employee shall be
ineligible for injury leave benefits.  If the employee fails to comply with the
terms of the assignment by failing to turn over to the City all such wage loss
benefits through Workers' Compensation laws, such failure shall constitute
grounds for termination of employment.
 
   (b)   If the application for injury leave benefits is approved by the City,
such employee may convert up to 347 hours of his accumulated sick leave balance
to injury leave.  Such conversion shall be at the rate of three hours of injury
leave for every one hour of accumulated sick leave balance.
 
185.17  LONGEVITY PAYMENT.
   (a)   Each full time employee hired before May 31, 2006 shall receive an
annual longevity payment based on a percentage of the employee’s total wage or
salary earnings (excluding overtime compensatory time paid out under Section
185.22(d) and longevity) for the longevity year most recently completed in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
 
Completed Years Percentage
of Service
5               2%
10              3%
15              4%
20              5%
25              6%
 
   (b)   Each full time employee hired on or after May 31, 2006 shall receive
an annual longevity payment based on a percentage of the employee’s total wage
or salary earnings (excluding overtime compensatory time paid out under Section
185.22(d) and longevity) for the longevity year most recently completed in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Completed Years Percentage
of Service
5               1%
10              1.5%
15              2%
20              2.5%
25              3%
185.18  LONGEVITY ADMINISTRATION RULES.
   (a)   Longevity payments shall be made on the last bi-weekly payday in
November.
 
   (b)   As used in Section
185.17 “Longevity year” means the 26 pay periods preceding the last pay period
in October.  In calendar years in which there are 27 pay periods, the
“Longevity year” shall include 27 pay periods.
 
   (c)   “Completed years of service” as used in Section
185.17(a) and (b) means a period of 365 days, whether continuous or not, in
which an employee has been in full time paid status.
 
   (d)   When an employee’s employment with the City is terminated for any
reason other than discharge, the employee shall be paid a longevity payment
based upon the employee’s total wage or salary earnings (excluding overtime
compensatory time paid out under Section
185.22(d) and longevity) since the completion of the previous longevity year. 
In calculating the longevity payment to be made upon termination, payouts for
accrued benefits such as vacation and sick leave shall not be included.  A
discharged employee shall receive no longevity payment.
 
   (e)   In determining a “completed year of service”, an employee shall be
credited with service to the end of the calendar year in which the longevity
payment is to be made.  If the employee fails to complete the employee’s final
year of service, the City shall deduct any overpayment arising under the
previous sentence from the employee’s final pay.
 
185.19  PERSONAL DAYS.
   (a)   After six months from date of hire, employees shall be entitled to 
two days of personal leave with pay per year, July 1 to June 30.  The days
shall be used in units of not less than four hours, and shall not be cumulative
or converted for cash payment.
 
   (b)   Except for unanticipated personal emergencies, application in writing
for personal leave shall be made in advance of the leave requested.  If an
emergency is such that the application cannot be made in advance, the employee
shall notify his immediate supervisor at the first opportunity and shall make
written application upon the employee's return to work.  The application shall
state the reason for the request but does not require specific detailed
information.
 
185.20  OTHER PAID LEAVE.
   (a)   Any employee who is required to appear in court for any of the
following reasons and who agrees to pay the City whatever fees received as a
result of such appearance, shall be granted a leave of absence with pay to the
extent that such appearance prevents any such employee from performing the
employee’s employment with the City:
      (1)   Any employee who is subpoenaed or directed by the City to appear in
any court proceedings which results from the employee’s position with the City;
      (2)   Any employee who is subpoenaed or directed by the City to appear in
any court proceedings in which the City is a party;
      (3)   Any employee subpoenaed to appear as a witness in any felony
proceedings;
      (4)   Any employee subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury; or
      (5)   Any employee who is required to serve as a juror in any court
proceeding.
 
   (b)   Any employee who is subpoenaed to appear in court in any civil
proceeding other than as described in subsection (a) above shall be permitted
to use vacation benefits in increments as low as one hour for each such
subpoenaed appearance.
 
   (c)   Employees shall be granted military leave as required by applicable
state and federal law.
 
   (d)   A City employee who is a certified Disaster Service Volunteer of the
American Red Cross may be granted leave from his regularly scheduled work with
pay for not to exceed thirty work days in each year to participate in
specialized disaster relief services for the American Red Cross, upon request
of the American Red Cross for the services of that employee and upon the
approval of the City Manager.  The City shall compensate an employee granted
leave under this subsection (b) at his regular, straight time rate of pay for
those regularly scheduled work hours during which the employee is absent from
his work.
 
   (e)   Employees who donate blood shall be permitted up to two hours of paid
leave of absence annually for the purpose of donating such blood.  No overtime
wages shall be paid for this purpose.
 
185.21  OVERTIME.
   (a)   An employee paid on an hourly basis required to work in excess of
eight (8) hours on any one day, or in excess of forty (40) hours in any one
week, shall be paid for the excess hours at a rate of one and one half times
the employee’s regular hourly rate, including longevity.
 
   (b)   Overtime pay shall be rounded to the nearest tenth (1/10) of an hour.
 
   (c)   In determining eligibility for overtime payment under this section,
hours in approved paid leave status shall be considered as hours worked.
 
185.22  COMPENSATORY TIME.
   All employees eligible for overtime payment pursuant to Section
185.21 shall be permitted to accrue compensatory time in lieu of overtime
payment with the following restrictions:
   (a)   Compensatory time hours will be credited at the rate of one and one
half (1½) times the overtime hours worked.
   (b)   Compensatory time shall be used with the same advance scheduling
approval as vacation.
   (c)   Usage of compensatory time may be denied if a replacement will be
required at an overtime premium rate.
   (d)   Compensatory time shall not be accrued beyond the last day of November
in any calendar year.  All earned but unused compensatory time shall be paid
out on the payday of the first full pay period in December at the base rate in
effect as of November 30 of such calendar year, including longevity.  Employees
may accrue compensatory time only up to a maximum of 80 hours per calendar
year.  All hours in excess of 80 shall be paid as overtime wages.
   (e)   Employees entitled to compensatory time pursuant to this section shall
be paid upon termination or layoff for any accumulated but unused compensatory
time.
 
185.23  SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
185.23(b) below, an employee regularly assigned to the second or third shift
shall be paid thirty cents ($.30) per hour in addition to the regular hourly
rate for time worked on the second or third shift.
 
   (b)   Employees classified as “Communication Coordinator” shall be paid
forty cents ($.40) per hour in addition to the regular hourly rate for all
hours worked on assigned shifts beginning at or after 2:00 P.M. and prior to 4:
00 A.M. in lieu of the shift differential provided in subsection (a) above.
 
   (c)   Shift differential payments shall be included in calculating the
overtime rates provided in Section
185.21.
 
185.24  LICENSE BONUS.
   (a)   All employees who are licensed or certified by the State of Ohio and
who use such license or certification in conjunction with the employee's
position with the City shall receive the following additional compensation:
      (1)   Water and Wastewater Plant Certificate:  Class I--$10.00 per week,
Class II--$15.00 per week, Class III--$25.00 per week, and Class IV--$50.00 per
week.
      (2)   Water Distribution Certificate:  Class I--$10.00 per week and Class
II--$15.00 per week.
      (3)   Certificate for approval for Laboratory Analysis:  $25.00 per week.
      (4)   Federal Aviation Act (F.A.A.) Maintenance License:  $5.00 per week.
      (5)   Federal Communication Commission (F.C.C.) Second Class Radio and
Telecommunications License:  $5.00 per week.
      (6)   Wastewater Collection Certificate:  Class I--$10.00 per week and
Class II--$15.00 per week.
      (7)   Chemical Applications License:  $5.00 per week.
 
   (b)   Any employee who receives additional compensation by reason of Section
185.24(a) and who obtains more than one of the licenses or certificates set
forth in Section
185.24(a) shall receive additional compensation for only that one license or
certificate used by the employee which provides the highest rate of
compensation, unless the City Manager determines that multiple licensure serves
the best interests of the City.
(Ord. 20-83. Passed 3-24-2020.) 
 
185.25  UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
   (a)   Captains in the Police Division shall be paid an amount equivalent to
the annual uniform allowance provided to members of the Fraternal Order of
Police/Ohio Labor Council (Command Officers) unit.
(Ord. 11-95. Passed 4-12-11.)
 
   (b)   Assistant Chiefs in the Fire Division shall be paid an amount
equivalent to the annual uniform allowance provided to members of the IAFF,
Local 333 bargaining unit.
(Ord. 12-109. Passed 4-10-12.)
 
   (c)   The uniform allowance under this Section
185.25 shall be paid in semi-annual payments in April and October.
(Ord. 09-78. Passed 3-31-09.)
 
185.26  MEDICAL INSURANCE.
   All full-time employees and the Mayor and City Commissioners shall be
provided with medical benefit coverage in accordance with the City of Springfis
eld Employee Benefit Plan.  The City Manager may amend the said City of
Springfield Employee Benefit Plan from time to time, as he deems necessary,
including the amount of the employee contribution to said plan, without further
legislative action being required.
185.27  DENTAL INSURANCE.
   All full-time employees and the Mayor and City Commissioners shall be
provided with dental benefit coverage in accordance with the City of
Springfield Employee Benefit Plan.  The City Manager may amend the plan from
time to time, as deemed necessary, including the amount of the employee
contribution to said plan without further legislative action being necessary.
 
185.28  LIFE INSURANCE.
   (a)   Each full-time employee, excepting salaried professional and
management employees, shall, commencing on their ninety-first day of continuous
employment, be furnished by the City at no cost to the employee a fifteen
thousand dollar ($15,000) term life insurance certificate with additional
provisions for accidental death, dismemberment, and waiver of premium coverage
should the insured employee become totally disabled prior to age sixty.
 
   (b)   Each full-time employee in the salaried professional and management
group shall, commencing on their ninety-first day of continuous employment, be
furnished by the City at no cost to the employee a term life insurance
certificate with additional provisions for accidental death, dismemberment and
waiver of premium coverage should the insured employee become totally disabled
prior to age sixty.  The amount of such insurance shall be equal to twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000), plus one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each two
thousand dollars ($2,000) that such person receives in base annual salary in
excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000).  However, notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, in no event shall the amount of such insurance
coverage exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
 
   (c)   Coverage shall be provided for eligible employees on authorized leave
of absence due to sickness or injury, for a period not to exceed six months.
 
   (d)   Each elected City Commissioner and the Mayor, during their term
commencing on the 91 st day of their first term, shall be furnished by the City
at no cost to the Commissioner or Mayor, a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000) term
life insurance certificate with additional provisions for accidental death,
dismemberment and waiver of premium coverage should the insured Commissioner or
Mayor become totally disabled prior to age sixty. 
 
185.29  RESIDENCY.
   Captains in the Police Division and Assistant Chiefs in the Fire Division
are required to reside within Clark County or any county adjacent to Clark
County, Ohio.
(Ord. 20-83. Passed 3-24-2020.)
 
185.30  TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.
   All full-time employees are eligible to participate, from and after the
first anniversary of their continuous service with the City, in a tuition
reimbursement program subject to the terms and conditions which follow.
   (a)   The Department of Personnel shall have responsibility for overall
administration of the tuition reimbursement program.  The Personnel Director
shall have the authority to interpret provisions of this section consistent
with the policy objectives stated in the enacting legislation.
   (b)   To be eligible for tuition reimbursement, a course must be only taken
at an accredited educational institution.  The course must either be directly
job-related or required pursuant to a degree program that is related to the
City's mission or is reasonably related to a promoted position within the
employees' classification series.  Determinations of eligibility under this
paragraph shall be within the sole discretion of the Personnel Director and
shall be final.
   (c)   For courses determined to be eligible, the City will pay one hundred
percent (100%) of the tuition, registration, and lab fees up to a maximum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per calendar year for undergraduate courses,
and up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per calendar year for
advanced degree programs.  The City will not reimburse costs for books,
housing, travel, meal or similar expenses.  The City will reimburse tuition
costs for only such undergraduate course as the employee earns either a "pass"
or a grade of "C", and only such graduate courses as the employee earns a
"pass" or a grade of "B".
   (d)   To be eligible for tuition reimbursement, an employee must notify his
or her department director, in writing, of the intention to participate in the
tuition reimbursement program no later than September 1st of the calendar year
prior to the year in which the employee intends to begin classes.  In addition,
applications for tuition reimbursement must be submitted not later than sixty
(60) days prior to registration for an eligible course.  In addition to the
employee's department director, the Personnel Director also must approve any
application as a pre-condition to tuition reimbursement.  The employee's
department director must indicate his or her approval once the eligible course
is completed for tuition costs to be reimbursed.  Only those costs which are
not otherwise covered by, e.g., GI Bill, scholarships, and other collateral
sources, will be reimbursed.  Evidence of the employee's final grade and the
educational institution's invoice must be attached to the request for
reimbursement.
   (e)   All employees receiving tuition reimbursement must continue their
employment with the City for at least one year following completion of any
course for which reimbursement was received.  If an employee voluntarily leaves
the City employment within that time, he or she must repay all moneys
previously reimbursed back to the City for courses begun or completed within a
one-year period prior to their separation.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary,
participation in this tuition reimbursement program is expressly subject to
budgetary limitations. Whenever the City Manager determines, in his sole
discretion, that there are insufficient funds for participation in this tuition
reimbursement program, that determination shall be final.
185.31  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   An employee of the City may present in writing any grievance which the
employee may have to the head of the employee’s department.  Within five
working days thereafter, such department head shall afford such employee an
opportunity to be heard and to present evidence relevant to such grievance. 
Within ten working days after hearing such grievance, the department head shall
render a decision in writing thereon, which may contain such orders or
directives as may be reasonably required to resolve the grievance and to
prevent the recurrence of the type of incident or practice which gave rise to
such grievance.  A copy of such decision shall be delivered to each person
affected thereby.
 
   Any person affected by any such decision may, within five working days from
the date he receives a copy thereof, appeal such decision by filing a notice of
such appeal with the City Manager.  Within ten working days from the filing of
such notice, the City Manager or his designated representative shall conduct a
hearing upon such appeal and shall permit any person affected by the decision
appealed from to be heard.  The City Manager, or his designee, shall, upon
conclusion of such hearing, affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed
from, as the facts may warrant, and the decision shall be rendered in writing
within fifteen days from the date of conclusion of such hearing.
 
185.32  BENEFITS FOR PERMANENT PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   An employee serving in a permanent part-time position shall receive the
benefits described in this Section
185.32.
   (a)   Holidays.  Permanent part-time employees shall be entitled to a paid
leave of absence on each of the holidays listed in Section
185.02(a) 1-11, provided that the listed holiday occurs on a day when the
employee is regularly scheduled to work.  The period of paid absence shall be
limited to the employee’s regular work day.
   (b)   Vacation. 
      1.   Permanent part-time employees shall receive 20 hours of paid
vacation leave after the completion of one year of continuous service.  After
the completion of one year of continuous service, such employees shall accrue
paid vacation leave at the rate of .0500 hours of leave for each hour in paid
status.
      2.   The time scheduled for use of vacation shall be approved by
management in accordance with policies established by the City Manager.
   (c)   Sick Leave.  Permanent part-time employees shall receive sick leave
benefits as described in Sections
185.10,
185.11,
185.12,
185.13,
185.14 and
185.15 above.
   (d)   Permanent part-time employees shall receive injury leave benefits as
described in Section
185.16 above.
   (e)   Longevity.  Permanent part-time employees shall not receive longevity
payments.
   (f)   Personal Day.  After six months from date of hire, permanent part-time
employees shall be entitled to eight hours of personal leave with pay per year,
July 1 to June 30.  The personal leave day shall be used in units of not less
than two hours and shall not be cumulative or converted for cash payment.  The
provision of Section
185.19(b) shall govern the usage of the personal day.
   (g)   Other Paid Leave.  Permanent part-time employees shall receive the
leave benefits described in Section
185.20 above.
   (h)   Overtime.  Permanent part-time employees shall be permitted to work
overtime (only with the prior written consent of the employee’s department
head).  Overtime compensation shall be limited to that required by state or
federal law.  Permanent part-time employees shall not be eligible for
compensatory time.
   (i)   Shift Differential.  No shift differential shall be paid to permanent
part-time employees.
   (j)   License Bonus.  No license bonus shall be paid to permanent part-time
employees.
   (k)   Insurance Benefits.  No medical or dental insurance benefits shall be
provided to permanent part-time employees.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 187
Fidelity Bonds
 
187.01   Individual bonds.
187.02   Blanket bond.
187.03   Excess blanket bond.
187.04   Miscellaneous blanket bond.
187.05   Recording bonds.
187.06   Application of chapter.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Bond of City Commission member--see CHTR.
Sec. 6
Blanket bonds--see Ohio R.C. 3.06
Failure to give bond--see Ohio R.C. 3.30, 731.49 et seq.
Validity of bond--see Ohio R.C. 3.34, 733.71, 3929.14 et seq.
Power to fix--see Ohio R.C. 731.04, 731.08
Notice when new bond required--see Ohio R.C. 731.50, 733.69
Approval of bonds--see Ohio R.C. 733.70
 
187.01  INDIVIDUAL BONDS.
   Pursuant to authority of the City Charter, the following officers, and no
others, shall execute, prior to entering upon the performance of their official
duties, individual bonds in not less than the penal amount set forth opposite
the title of their respective office:
   (a)   City Treasurer         $100,000
   (b)   City Commissioners      $  10,000
   (c)   Clerk of Municipal Court    $100,000
 
187.02  BLANKET BOND.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3.06, the officers and employees of the following
departments, and no others, may be covered by a blanket bond purchased by the
City in the penal amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) indemnifying
the City against loss occasioned by the failure of the officers and employees
of such departments to faithfully perform their
respective duties:
   Office of City Manager
   Office of Clerk of Commission
   Municipal Court
   Department of Central Services
   Department of Development
   Department of Finance
   Department of Health
   Department of Law
   Department of Parks and Recreation
   Department of Public Safety - Fire Division
   Department of Public Safety - Police Division
(Ord. 88-245.  Passed 7-12-88.)
 
187.03  EXCESS BLANKET BOND.
   The officers and employees of the following departments, and no others, may
be covered by an excess blanket bond purchased by the City in the penal sum of
seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) indemnifying the City against loss
occasioned by embezzlement or any other dishonest act:
   Office of City Manager
   Office of Clerk of Commission
   Municipal Court
   Department of Central Services
   Department of Development
   Department of Finance--Purchasing Division
   Department of Finance--Utility Billing Division
   Department of Health
   Department of Parks and Recreation
   Department of Public Safety--Fire Division
   Department of Public Safety--Police Division
(Ord. 88-245.  Passed 7-12-88.)
 
187.04  MISCELLANEOUS BLANKET BOND.
   All officers and employees of the City, except those specified in Sections
187.01 through
187.03, may be covered by a blanket bond in the penal amount of five-thousand
dollars ($5,000) indemnifying the City against loss occasioned by embezzlement
or any other dishonest act.
 
187.05  RECORDING BONDS.
   Each bond authorized by this chapter, upon its approval, shall be delivered
to the Finance Director, who shall immediately record it in a record provided
for that purpose and file and carefully preserve it in his office.
 
187.06  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Any section of this Administrative Code, or other ordinance, resolution,
part of ordinance, word or phrase in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be modified, changed and altered to conform to the provisions of
this chapter.  This chapter is not deemed to change, alter, modify or repeal
the provisions of any other section of this Administrative Code or other
ordinance except as to bonding requirements.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 188
Police Division
 
188.01   Leave of absence with pay on holidays; exceptions.
188.02   Paid sick leave.
188.03   Emergency medical attention.
188.04   Life insurance.
188.05   Residence requirement.
188.06   Stand-by pay for clerk-stenographers.
188.07   Lateral entry; selection of entry-level police officer without
competitive civil service examination.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Police Division--see CHTR.
Sec. 92
Established--see ADM.
139.04
 
188.01  LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY ON HOLIDAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Except as hereinafter provided, the Chief and Assistant Chief of the
Police Division shall be entitled to leave of absence with pay on each of the
holidays and shall receive compensation therefor equivalent to one day's
regular pay.
 
   (b)   In order for an employee to receive his regular pay for the holiday he
shall work his regularly scheduled day immediately preceding and succeeding the
holiday.  Employees on sick leave, vacation or injury leave shall be considered
as working their regular schedule for pay purposes.
 
   (c)   The birthday holiday is not a holiday for overtime or premium pay
purposes.  If an employee's birthday falls on his regularly scheduled day off
or on another holiday, he shall be given a compensatory day off commensurate
with the needs of the department.
(Ord. 72-90.  Passed 5-2-72.)
 
188.02  PAID SICK LEAVE.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 124.38, each full-time employee of the City shall be
entitled to four and six-tenths hours with pay for every eighty hours of
service, to include sick leave, authorized vacation, paid holidays and
overtime, but not leave of absence or lay-off; such sick leave to be granted by
the appointing authority for absence due to illness, injury, exposure to
contagious disease, which could be communicated to other employees, or to
serious illness of death in the employee's immediate family.
(Ord. 72-90.  Passed 5-2-72.)
 
188.03  EMERGENCY MEDICAL ATTENTION.
   (a)   The acting head of the Police Division is authorized to call a surgeon
to render surgical attention in an emergency to policemen disabled in the
discharge of their duty.
 
   (b)   Bills for services rendered in accordance with subsection (a) hereof
shall be presented to the City Commission and upon approval of the Commission
and the City Manager, the Director of Finance is authorized to issue his
warrant for the payment of such bill.
(Ord. 72-90.  Passed 5-2-72.)
 
188.04  LIFE INSURANCE.
   (a)   All City police, through the rank of Captain shall be furnished with
an eight thousand dollar ($8,000) term life insurance policy with provision for
accidental death and dismemberment coverage to be effective as of December 1,
1974.  Such coverage is to be at no cost to the persons covered.
 
   (b)   On January 1, 1975, an additional two thousand dollars ($2,000) of
term life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment coverage shall be
provided at no cost to the persons covered.
(Ord. 74-279.  Passsed 11-19-74.)
 
188.05  RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT.
   All members of the Police Division shall reside within Clark County.
 
188.06  STAND-BY PAY FOR CLERK-STENOGRAPHERS.
   The Chief of Police or other supervisory personnel within the Police
Division authorized by the Chief of Police may require any non-bargaining unit
member of the Police Division employed as a clerk-stenographer to make
themselves available on a stand-by basis during the employee's non-routine work
hours to provide stenography services for the Police Division.  The Chief of
Police or other supervisory personnel authorized by the Chief of Police shall
determine that such stand-by services are needed and shall designate and inform
the person who is needed to serve in a stand-by capacity prior to the
commencement of such stand-by period.  Any employee required to serve in a
stand-by capacity shall keep the Police Division informed as to where they are
and make themselves available for work during such stand-by period.  Any such
employee shall report to work within thirty minutes of notification that their
services are needed.  Any employee required to serve in a stand-by capacity
pursuant to this section shall receive the following compensation:
   (a)   Any employee serving in a stand-by capacity who is not required to
report to work shall receive compensation equal to one hour of work at one and
one-half times the employee's regular base compensation for each eight-hour
period of stand-by service the employee is required to serve but during which
the employee is not required to report to work;
   (b)   Any employee serving in a stand-by capacity who is required to report
for work shall receive compensation at the rate of one and one-half the
employee's regular base compensation for each hour of work performed; or, if
less than two hours of work is required, then for two hours of work at one and
one-half times the employee's regular base compensation.
 
   In no event shall an employee receive compensation pursuant to both
subsections (a) and (b) above for the same eight-hour period of stand-by
service, and any compensation received pursuant to subsection (a) above shall
not inure to the benefit of the employee for any other purpose.
(Ord. 88-62.  Passed 2-9-88.)
 
188.07  LATERAL ENTRY; SELECTION OF ENTRY-LEVEL POLICE OFFICERS WITHOUR
COMPETITIVE CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATION.
   Pursuant to the provisions of
Section 47 of the Charter of The City of Springfield, Ohio, the City Commission
has determined that certain candidates for appointment to the position of
police officer may be considered for appointment without participating in a
competitive civil service examination process.  Such candidates shall be
selected pursuant to the procedures and criteria set forth hereafter, and shall
have such seniority rights and probationary period as set forth herein.
   (a)   Selection Procedures and Criteria.  Pursuant to appointing authority
which may be delegated by the City Manager under
Section 21(1) of the Charter of The City of Springfield, Ohio, the Chief of
Police and Personnel Director shall together review resumes and applications to
determine which applicants meet the lateral entry criteria hereinafter
described.  Persons shall be eligible for consideration by way of lateral
entry, and without participating in a competitive civil service examination
process, if they are currently employed as a police officer, deputy sheriff or
state highway patrol officer and if they maintain current State of Ohio Peace
Officer Certification.  Two separate lists for the position of police officer
may be maintained, one determined by conducting the competitive civil service
examination process and the other by way of the lateral entry procedures.  The
Chief of Police and Personnel Director together may decide to consider a
candidate from either list to fill a vacancy.
      As with candidates for appointment who participate in a competitive civil
service examination process, lateral entry candidates must submit to a thorough
background investigation, polygraph examination, psychological evaluation, and
an oral interview.  A conditional job offer may be extended to a lateral entry
candidate, but only subject to a complete physical examination which must be
passed in order to be appointed to the position of police officer.
      In addition to possessing current Ohio Peace Officer Training
Certificates, lateral entry candidates must have a minimum of one year's
experience up to the date of application in their current position as either a
police officer, deputy sheriff or state highway patrol officer.  Part-time
officers or sheriffs and candidates who may be laid off will not be considered
under lateral entry processes, but, instead, may be eligible to participate in
the competitive civil service examination process.  Lateral entry candidates
may come from any sized jurisdiction.
      In addition to any criteria set forth in this Section, lateral entry
candidates must meet the minimum qualifications for appointment to the position
of police officer as may, from time-to-time, be enforced for candidates who
participate in the competitive civil service examination process.
   (b)   Seniority.  Seniority in the Police Division for lateral entry
candidates who are appointed to the position of police officer shall be
determined based upon the date of hire with the City.  Seniority for promotion
or lay-off purposes for such officers shall also begin with the day of
appointment as a police officer in the Springfield Police Division.
   (c)   Rate of Compensation.  Successful lateral entry candidates for
appointment to the position of police officer shall receive compensation at a
rate between current entry level pay and Step 4 of such pay-scale as may, from
time-to-time, appear in the collective bargaining agreement between the City
and the Springfield Police Patrolman's Association ("SPPA").
   (d)   Probationary Period.  Persons appointed through the lateral entry
process to the position of police officer shall serve a probationary period of
one year.
      (Ord. 98-176.  Passed 5-19-98.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 189
Promotional Examinations for Police and Fire Divisions
 
189.01   Applicability of chapter.
189.02   Contents.
189.03   Written test.
189.04   Oral test for promotion.
189.05   Credit for efficiency in service.
189.06   Credit for seniority in service.
189.07   Relative weight to be given tests.
189.071   Order of tests in the Fire Division; ranks of captain and above.
189.08   Amendments.
 
189.01  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall govern promotional examinations for
uniformed personnel in the Police and Fire Divisions of the City other than a
promotion to the rank of Chief of Police or to the rank of Fire Chief.  The
provisions of this chapter shall serve to implement the provisions of Charter
Section 47 of the Charter, relating to such examinations.
(Ord. 83-476.  Passed 10-18-83.)
 
189.02  CONTENTS.
   The examination for promotion of any person in the Police Division or Fire
Division shall consist of the following elements or segments, to wit:
   (a)   Written test;
   (b)   Oral test;
   (c)   Credit for efficiency in service; and
   (d)   Credit for seniority in service
      (Ord. 83-476.  Passed 10-18-83.)
 
189.03  WRITTEN TEST.
   (a)   The written test for promotion shall, in all cases, be developed by a
recognized, competent agency, individual or individuals familiar with the
operations of modern police agencies in the case of a test for promotion in the
Police Division and with the operations of modern fire agencies in the case of
a test for promotion in the Fire Division.  Before the written test is
developed, the City shall provide such agency, individual or individuals
pertinent information regarding the division and rank for which the test is to
be given.  Such test shall have a minimum passing score which shall be made
known to the examinees prior to their taking the test.  Passage of the written
test shall be a prerequisite for eligibility for promotion and shall be a
prerequisite for continuation to any other portion of the examination process
set forth in Section
189.02 hereof.  In the case of examinations for promotion to the rank of
lieutenant in the Police Division, however, "passage of the written test" shall
mean an examinee shall have received a test score no lower than the score
received by the sixth highest ranked examinee.
(Ord. 01-1.  Passed 1-2-01.)
 
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph A. of this section, in the
case of a test for promotion to the rank of captain in the Fire Division, there
shall be a type of written test known as an "in-basket" examination, and for a
test for promotion to the rank of lieutenant or captain in the Police Division
or to the rank of assistant chief or battalion chief in the Fire Division,
there shall be a type of written test known as an "assessment center"
examination, each of which may be developed by an outside agency or by the
staff of the Personnel Department.  Although in-basket examinations and
assessment centers will primarily involve management decisions which test
supervisory and management skills, instead of objective technical knowledge, to
the extent possible position announcements regarding the in-basket portion of
the promotional examination in the Fire Division or assessment center for
promotion to the rank of lieutenant or captain in the Police Division shall
indicate source material upon which the examination will be based.  Assessment
centers shall include both written and oral exercises.  However, it is
recognized there are no source materials which provide a definitive answer for
tests of supervisory and/or management skills.  In the case of in-basket
examinations and assessment centers, scoring criteria are not answer keys, but
are general criteria from which items are scored.
(Ord. 01-1.  Passed 1-2-01.)
 
   (c)   The City may elect not to give an in-basket examination for a
particular promotional rank, in which event the weight which would have
otherwise been given to the in-basket portion of that examination shall be
applied toward the other written examination portion of the promotional test. 
(Ord. 92-154.  Passed 4-28-92.)
 
189.04  ORAL TEST FOR PROMOTION.
   (a)   The oral test for promotion shall be administered and developed by a
competent agency, individual or individuals not connected with the City and in
concert with representatives of the City's Personnel Division, and
representatives of the affected division sitting in an advisory capacity.  The
oral test shall be given by an interview board consisting of not less than
three nor more than five members and a majority of the members must have
experience in practical police administration and command experience in a city
of comparable size or larger in the case of an oral test for promotion in the
Police Division and experience in practical fire administration and command
experience in a city of comparable size or larger in the case of an oral test
for promotion in the Fire Division.  Members of the interview board shall not
reside in Clark County, Ohio.  Each board member shall each score the oral test
for each examinee and the respective scores of the board members given such
examinee shall then be averaged to determine such examinee's score on the test.
(Ord. 87-99.  Passed 2-24-87.)
 
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph A. of this section, in the
case of promotional examinations in the Fire Division, the oral test for
promotion shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   All candidates shall appear for their oral interview in station
wear.
      (2)   No candidates may bring a resume or other documentation to their
interview; candidates will only respond orally to questions except as may
otherwise be required as part of an assessment center.
      (3)   Scoring shall be by consensus rating of the members of the
interview board except as may otherwise be required as part of an assessment
center.
      (4)   In the case of promotional examinations to the rank of lieutenant,
only, the first five questions of each multiple-choice test shall be read aloud
by the test administrator.  Each of such questions shall be read twice before
going to the next question; no question shall be repeated more than twice.  All
questions from the multiple-choice test, both oral and written, will be
weighted equally.  No other portion of promotional examinations to the rank of
lieutenant shall be oral except as set forth in this subparagraph.
         (Ord. 99-41.  Passed 2-2-99.)
 
189.05  CREDIT FOR EFFICIENCY IN SERVICE.
   Credit for efficiency in service shall consist of job related performance
evaluations and each such evaluation shall be evidenced by numerical value.  A
job related performance evaluation for each uniformed employee of the Police
and Fire Divisions shall be conducted semi-annually by the City and the
numerical score to be used for consideration in the overall examination process
for promotion of an examinee shall be the average of the numerical scores of
such examinee for his or her last two performance evaluations.  Each employee
of the divisions shall be provided a copy of each of his or her evaluations as
they are completed.  The numerical credit for efficiency in service to be
applied in the examination process shall be made known to each prospective
applicant for promotion prior to the giving of the written test portion of the
examination relating to such promotion.
(Ord. 83-476.  Passed 10-18-83.)
 
189.06  CREDIT FOR SENIORITY IN SERVICE.
   Credit for seniority in service shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of Ohio R.C. 124.31 in the case of promotions in the Police Division
and Ohio R.C. 124.45 in the case of the Fire Division.
(Ord. 83-476.  Passed 10-18-83.)
 
189.07  RELATIVE WEIGHT TO BE GIVEN TESTS.
   The following respective relative percentages of weight shall apply to the
respective elements of the examination process described hereunder:
 
   (a)   Fire Division Promotional Examination.
 
(1) Lieutenant
    A. Written and Oral Tests           89%
    B. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    C. Credit for Efficiency in Service 1%
(2) Captain
    A. Written Test                     49%
    B. In-basket Test                   30%
    C. Oral Test                        10%
    D. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    E. Credit for Efficiency in Service 1%
(3) Battalion Chief
    A. Assessment Center                89%
    B. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    C. Credit for Efficiency in Service 1%
(4) Assistant Chief
    A. Assessment Center                89%
    B. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    C. Credit for Efficiency in Service 1%
       (Ord. 99-41.  Passed 2-2-99.)
   (b)   Police Division Promotional Examination.
 
(1) Captain
    A. Assessment Center                80%
    B. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    C. Credit for Efficiency in Service 10%
(2) Lieutenant
    A. Written Test                     10%
    B. Assessment Center                70%
    C. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    D. Credit for Efficiency in Service 10%
(3) Sergeant
    A. Written Test                     50%
    B. Oral Test                        30%
    C. Credit for Seniority in Service  10%
    D. Credit for Efficiency in Service 10%
       (Ord. 01-1.  Passed 1-2-01.)
189.071 ORDER OF TESTS IN THE FIRE DIVISION; RANKS OF CAPTAIN AND ABOVE.
   Promotional examinations to the rank of captain or above in the Fire
Division shall be given in the following order:  (1) written, (2) in-basket,
(3) oral.  Only those candidates for promotion who achieve a passing score on
the combined written and in-basket portions of the examination shall be
eligible to sit for the oral examination.  These requirements shall be waived
when as assessment center is utilized.
(Ord. 99-41.  Passed 2-2-99.)
 
189.08  AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to any of the sections of this chapter shall not be approved by
the City Commission unless and until such proposed amendment or amendments, as
the case may be, have been  reviewed  by a committee  consisting  of  three 
members  representing the Administration of the City and three representative
members of the safety forces affected by this chapter, and the opportunity to
make recommendations with respect to such amendment or amendments has been
afforded such committee.  In the event that the foregoing six members are
unable to reach agreement as a recommendation with respect to such amendment or
amendments, then they shall choose a seventh member for the committee to review
any proposed amendment or amendments.
(Ord. 91-472.  Passed 12-3-91.)
 
 
 
TITLE ELEVEN - Judicial
Chap.
191.  Municipal Court
 
 
 
CHAPTER 191
Municipal Court
 
   EDITOR'S NOTE:  The Clark County Municipal Court having territorial
jurisdiction within Clark County, has been established under Ohio R.C. 1901.01
et seq.  Ohio R.C. 1901.25 provides that the Municipal Court may provide by
rule how jurors shall be chosen.  Jurors' fees in any criminal case involving
the violation of a City ordinance shall be paid out of the City Treasury.  The
Municipal Court, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 1901.26(A), may establish a schedule of
fees and costs to be taxed in any action or proceeding, whether civil or
criminal.  Ohio R.C. 1901.31(F) provides that fines received for violation of
Springfield ordinances shall be paid into the City Treasury.  Rule 13 of the
Ohio Traffic Rules as promulgated by the Ohio Supreme Court provides that a
court shall establish a traffic violations bureau and specifies certain
restrictions as to the designated offenses and schedule of fines to be accepted
as waiver payment in lieu of court appearance.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Release of Court Clerk's liability for loss of funds - see Ohio R.C. 131.18 et
seq.
Municipal court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901
Bond for Court Clerk required - see Ohio R.C. 1901.31(D)
Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
 
 
 
TITLE THIRTEEN - Taxation TITLE THIRTEEN - Taxation
Chap.
195.  Tax on Earned Income.
Chap.
196.  Municipal Income Tax on Earned Income.
Chap.
197.  Hotel Excise Tax.
Chap.
199.  Motor Vehicle License Tax.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 195
Tax on Earned Income
 
195.01   Purpose and taxable years governed by this Chapter 1
95.
195.02   Definitions.
195.03   Imposition of tax.
195.04   Period of taxation.
195.05   Return and payment.
195.06   Collection at source.
195.07   Declarations.
195.08   Duties of the Commissioner of Taxation; records.
195.09   Investigative powers of Commissioner of Taxation; confidentiality.
195.10   Interest and penalties.
195.11   Collection of unpaid taxes.
195.12   Violations; penalties.
195.13   Income Tax Division; Board of Review.
195.14   Allocation of funds.
195.15   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities; other credits.
195.16   Saving clause.
195.17   Duration of levy and collection of tax.
195.18   Amendments.
195.19   Imposition of additional tax.
195.20   Imposition of supplemental additional tax.
195.21   Renewal of additional tax.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Taxation of income - see CHTR.
Sec. 30
Municipal income taxes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 718
Income Tax Division - see ADM.
125.04
 
195.01  PURPOSE AND TAXABLE YEARS GOVERNED BY THIS  CHAPTER
195.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a tax at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and on net
profits, as here and after provided.  Not more than nine-tenths of the proceeds
of the levy of such tax shall be used to provide funds for the purpose of
financing general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension
and enlargement of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements
of the City and not less than one-tenth of the proceeds of the levy of such tax
shall be used only to provide funds for the purpose of financing capital
improvements of the City.
 
   (b)   The provisions of this Chapter
195 shall apply only to taxable years beginning prior to January 1, 2016. With
the adoption of Ordinance 15-319, this Chapter
195 shall continue in effect and shall continue to govern the administration,
collection, and enforcement of the City’s municipal income tax for taxable
years 2015 and before.
(Ord. 15-319, passed 12-8-15; Ord. 04-365, passed 11-2-04 by election.)
 
195.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of Ohio Revised Code Sections 718.01, 718.021, 718.03,
718.05, 718.051, 718.08, and 718.14 shall be applicable to this Chapter.  As
used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, except as and if the context indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   (a)   "Association" means a partnership, limited partnership or any other
form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
   (b)   "Board of Review" means the Board created by and constituted as
provided in Section 
195.13.
   (c)   "Business" means an enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of
any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by
an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation or any other entity.
   (d)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (e)   "City Attorney" means an attorney in the City's Law Department.
   (f)   "Commissioner of Taxation" means the City employee designated by the
City's Finance Director to perform the duties of the Commissioner of Taxation. 
The Commissioner of Taxation is the tax administrator for the City for the
purposes of applying this Chapter.
   (g)   "Corporation" means a corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio or any other state,
territory or foreign country or dependency.  The term "corporation" includes an
S corporation.
   (h)   "Employee" means every individual performing services if the
relationship between him and the person for whom he performs such services is
the legal relationship of employer and employee.
   (i)   "Employer" means an individual, co-partnership, association,
corporation, government body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or
not organized for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis.
   (j)   "Fiscal year" means an accounting period of twelve months ending on
the last day of any month other than December.
   (k)   "Net profit," for taxable years prior to January 1, 2004, means the
net gain from the operation of a business, profession or enterprise after
provision for all ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in
accordance with the accounting system used by the taxpayer for Federal income
tax purposes and in the case of an unincorporated entity, without deduction of
salaries paid to partners or other owners, or of taxes imposed by this Chapter
and Federal and all other taxes based on income.  For taxable years beginning
on and after January 1, 2004, the term "net profit," as applied to sole
proprietorships, shall have the meaning set forth in the preceding sentence, as
modified by the third paragraph of Ohio Revised Code Subsection 718.01(E).  For
taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2004, the term "net profit," as
applied to business entities other than sole proprietorships, is defined in
Ohio Revised Code Section 718.01.
   (l)   "Nonresident" means an individual domiciled outside the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
   (m)   "Nonresident unincorporated business entity" means an unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
   (n)   "Person" includes individuals, firms, companies, business trusts,
estates, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, 
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.  Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied to
an association, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporation, the officers thereof, and any employee having control supervision
or charged with the responsibility of tax law compliance on the part of a
natural person, co-partnership, fiduciary, association or corporation.
   (o)   "Resident" means an individual domiciled in the City of Springfield,
Ohio.
   (p)   "Resident unincorporated business entity" means an unincorporated
business entity having an office or place of business within the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
   (q)   "Taxable year," for taxable years prior to January 1, 2004, means the
calendar year, or the fiscal year ending during such calendar year, upon the
basis of which the net profits are to be computed under this chapter and, in
the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such
return is made.  Unless approved  by the Commissioner of Taxation, the taxable
year of an individual shall be a calendar year.  For taxable years beginning on
and after January 1, 2004, "taxable year" is defined in Ohio Revised Code
Section 718.01.
   (r)   "Taxpayer" means a person, whether an individual, co-partnership,
association or any corporation or other entity, required hereunder to file a
return or pay a tax.  On and after January 1, 2004, the term "taxpayer" is
further defined in Ohio Revised Code Section 718.01.
   (s)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
      (Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
   (t)   The phrase, “work done or services performed or rendered in the City,”
includes all work done or services performed within the corporate boundaries of
the City and all work done or services performed as a result of employment in
the City.
      (Ord. 09-106. Passed 4-28-09.)
   (u)   “Other compensation” means other forms of income of the kind and
character of salaries, wages, and commissions, and also income such as gambling
winnings and prizes awarded.
      (Ord. No. 09-327. Passed 12-8-09.)
 
195.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (a)   An annual tax at the rate and for the purposes specified in Section
195.01 hereof shall be imposed during the effective period of this chapter upon
the following:
      (1)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned,
received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto residents of the City;
      (2)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned,
received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto nonresidents for work done
or services performed or rendered in the City;
      (3)   A.   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned, received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto all resident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other activities derived from work
done or service performed or rendered and business or other activities
conducted in the City; and
         B.   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned, received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto a resident partner
or owner of a resident unincorporated business entity not attributable to the
City and not levied against such unincorporated business entity;
      (4)   A.   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned, received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto all non-resident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other activities, derived from work
done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities
conducted in the City, whether or not such unincorporated business entity has
an office or place of business in the City; and
         B.   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned, received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto a resident partner
or owner of a non-resident unincorporated business entity not attributable to
the City and not levied against such unincorporated business entity; and
      (5)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits earned,
received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto all corporations derived
from work done or services performed or rendered and business or other
activities conducted in the City, whether or not such corporations have an
office or place of business in the City.
 
   (b)   The portion of the net profits attributable to the City of a taxpayer
conducting a business, profession or other activity both within and without the
boundaries of the City shall be determined as provided in Ohio R.C. 718.02, and
in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of
Taxation pursuant to this chapter.
 
   (c)   Exception.  The tax provided for herein shall not be levied upon the
military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of the United States,
the compensation for personal services of individuals under eighteen years of
age, unemployment compensation provided by a government entity, poor relief,
proceeds of life insurance, workers' compensation payments, alimony income or
upon the net profits of any civic, charitable, religious, fraternal or other
organization specified in Ohio R.C. 718.01 to the extent that such net profits
are exempted from municipal income taxes under such section.  The items of
income described in subdivisions (1) and (2) of the first paragraph of Ohio
Revised Code Section 718.01(E) shall not be exempt from taxation or from
withholding taxes imposed under this Chapter.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.04  PERIOD OF TAXATION.
   The tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensation, and with respect to the net profits
of businesses, professions or other activities earned, received, accrued or in
any way set apart unto taxpayers during the effective period of this chapter;
provided, however, that no income earned, received, accrued or in any way set
apart unto a taxpayer shall be taxed more than once by the City.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.05  RETURN AND PAYMENT.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
195.05(l), all individuals eighteen years of age and older, who were residents
of the City during any part of a taxable year shall make and file a return, as
described in this Section, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the end of such individual's taxable year.  Each taxpayer or person
who engages in business, or whose salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall, whether or
not a tax is due thereon, make and file a return on or before the fifteenth day
of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year, with the
Commissioner of Taxation setting forth:
      (1)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned, received, accrued or in any way set apart unto him, and/or
gross income from such business less expenses which the Board of Review may
allow by regulation;
      (2)   The amount of tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other
information as the Commissioner may require, including a statement that the
figures used in the return are the figures used in the return for federal
income tax adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable under the
provisions of this chapter.
 
   (b)   When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different
from the calendar year, the return shall be filed within three and one-half
months from the end of such fiscal year or other period.
 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio Revised Code Section 718.051,
beginning January 1, 2004, any taxpayer that has requested an extension for
filing a federal income tax return may request an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return.  The taxpayer shall make the request by filing a
copy of the taxpayer's request for a federal filing extension with the
Commissioner of Taxation.  The request for extension shall be filed not later
than the last day for filing the municipal income tax return as prescribed by
this Chapter.  The Commissioner of Taxation shall grant such a request for
extension filed before January 1, 2004, for a period not less than the period
of the federal extension request.  For taxable years beginning after 2003, the
extended due date of the income tax return required to be filed under this
Chapter shall be the last day of the month following the month to which the due
date of the federal income tax return has been extended.  The Commissioner of
Taxation may deny a taxpayer's request for extension only if the taxpayer fails
to timely file the request, fails to file a copy of the request for the federal
extension, owes the City any delinquent municipal income tax or any penalty,
interest, assessment, or other charge for the late payment or nonpayment of the
municipal income tax, or has failed to file any required income tax return,
report, or other related document for a prior tax period.  No penalty shall be
assessed in those cases in which the return is filed within the period as
extended; however, the amount by which the actual tax found to be due exceeds
the payment submitted with the tentative return shall bear interest, pursuant
to the provisions of Section
195.10, from the due date established in subdivision (a) of this Section
195.05.
 
   (d)   The taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of the filing
thereof, pay to the Commissioner the amount of taxes shown as due thereon;
provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due shall have been
deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of Section
195.06, or where any portion of such tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer
pursuant to the provision of Section
195.07, credit for the amount so paid shall be deducted from the amount shown
to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of
filing such return.
 
   (e)   All individuals, businesses, employers, brokers or others doing
business who engage persons, either on an employer-employee basis or as
independent contractors, and are not subject to withholding, shall report to
the City the name, address and total amount of all salaries, wages, commissions
and other compensation in excess of six hundred dollars ($600.00) earned,
received, accrued or in any other way set apart unto each taxpayer which is
subject to the tax under this chapter.  All contractors shall indicate the
total amount of payments, which have accumulated to more than six hundred
dollars ($600.00), to any subcontractor or contract employee who did business
in, or is a resident of the City in a report to the City which shall indicate
the names, addresses, and amounts paid.  All reports made pursuant to this
subsection shall be filed with the City on or before April 15 of each year.
 
   (f)   In the case of a corporation that carries on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the City
constituting a portion only of its total business, the Commissioner shall
require such additional information as may be necessary to ascertain whether
net profits allocable to the City are being distorted by the shifting of
income, apportionment of expenses, or other devices available to a common
control.  If the Commissioner finds that a person's net profits allocable to
the City are distorted by reason of transactions with stockholders or with
other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or
transactions with such division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or
activity or by some other method, he shall adjust such transactions so as to
produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the City.  If necessary,
the Commissioner may require the filing of a consolidated return.
 
   (g)   An amended return shall be filed in order to report additional income
and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax overpaid, subject to
the requirements and/or limitations contained in subsection (i) hereof.  A
taxpayer may not change the method of filing, accounting, or apportionment of
net profits after the due date for filing the original return.
(Ord. No. 09-327. Passed 12-8-09.)
 
   (h)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the City is
entitled under the provisions of this chapter may, provided the taxpayer files
his request with the Commissioner within three years after the tax was due or
the return was filed, whichever is later, have such overpayment applied against
any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his election indicated on the return,
such overpayment or part thereof shall be refunded, provided that no refund
shall be made or tax collected where the refund or total tax liability is less
than one dollar ($1.00).
(Ord. 09-106. Passed 4-28-09.)
 
   (i)   A claiming of credit for amounts paid to any other municipality shall
constitute an assignment and a transfer to the City of all right, title and
interest of the taxpayer claiming the credit in and to any claim for refund of
the amounts so paid to the other municipality.  In the event of a refund not
received by the City in an amount equal to the credit claimed by reason of tax
payments made to another municipality and subject to reciprocity, then the
taxpayer shall be liable to the City for and as taxes due from the date of the
filing of the annual return upon which the credit was claimed of the amounts by
which the claimed credit exceeds the amount of refund received by the City,
with interest pursuant to Section 
195.10.
 
   (j)   Within three months after determination of any federal tax liability
affecting a taxpayer's City tax liability, such taxpayer shall make and file an
amended City return showing income subject to City tax based upon such final
determination of federal tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due
thereon or make claim for refund of any overpayment.
 
   (k)   Individuals who were not residents of the City at any time during a
taxable year and who had all of their income subject to taxation under this
Chapter for such taxable year withheld upon pursuant to Section
195.06 are not required to file a return under this Section.
 
   (l)   A resident who is over 65 years of age and has had no taxable income
in the year for which a return would otherwise be due and the immediately
preceding three (3) years need not file a return.
(Ord. 03-381, passed 11-25-03; Ord. 15-229, passed 9-1-15.)
 
195.06  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   Except as prohibited by Ohio Revised Code 718.03, each employer within
or doing business within the City who employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis shall deduct at the time of the
payment of such salary, wage, commission or other compensation, provided such
salary, wage, commission, or other compensation are qualifying wages, the tax
at the rate specified in Section
195.01 on the gross salary, wage, commission or other compensation due by the
employer to such employee and shall on or before the last day specified below
make a return and pay the Commissioner of Taxation the amount of tax so
deducted.
      (1)   The term "banking day", for purposes of this section, means that
part of any day on which a bank is open to the public for carrying on
substantially all of its banking functions;
      (2)   "Month" means a calendar month;
      (3)   "Partial monthly withholding period" means the period ending on the
third, seventh, eleventh, fifteenth, nineteenth, twenty-second, twenty-fifth,
or last day of a month, as the context requires;
      (4)   "Undeposited taxes" means the taxes an employer is required to
deduct and withhold from an employee's compensation pursuant to this chapter
that have not been remitted to the Tax Commissioner pursuant to this section.
      (5)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold any amount under
this chapter shall file a return and shall pay the amount required by law as
follows:
         A.   If, at the end of each calendar quarter, undeposited taxes total
one thousand dollars ($1,000) or less, payment of the undeposited taxes for
that calendar quarter shall be made no later than thirty days following the
last day of March, June, September, and December of each year;
         B.   If subsection (a)(5)A. hereof does not apply, payment of
undeposited taxes for each month shall be made no later than ten banking days
following the close of the month during which the undeposited taxes were
withheld;
         C.   If, for any partial monthly withholding period, undeposited taxes
total more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), payment of the undeposited
taxes shall be made within three banking days following the end of the partial
monthly withholding period during which the fifteen thousand dollar ($15,000)
limitation was exceeded.  Every employer required to deduct and withhold any
amount under this chapter shall make payment by electronic funds transfer
pursuant to subsection
195.06(e) and (f).  Nothing in this subsection (5)C. shall be construed as
relieving an employer from complying with subsection (a)(5)B. hereof. 
            Ord. 95-152.  Passed 5-2-95.)
      (6)   The requirements of subsection (a)(5) hereof are met if the amount
paid is not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the actual tax withheld for
the prior quarterly, or monthly, or partial monthly withholding period, and the
underpayment is not due to willful neglect.  Any underpayment of withheld tax
shall be paid by the last day prescribed for the next regular payment for a
monthly or quarterly withholding period or within thirty days of the date on
which the withheld tax was due for a partial monthly withholding period.
      (7)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that quarterly or monthly payments
would result in a delay that might jeopardize the collection of withholding
payments, he may order that the payments be made weekly, or more frequently if
necessary, and the payments shall be made no later than three banking days
following the close of the period for which the jeopardy payment order is
made.  An order requiring weekly or more frequent payments shall be delivered
to the employer personally or by certified mail and remains in effect until the
Tax Commissioner notifies the employer to the contrary.
      (8)   In addition to the returns required to be filed and payments
required to be made under subsection (a)(5) hereof, every employer required to
deduct and withhold taxes shall file, not later than the twenty-eighth day of
February of each year, an annual return covering the aggregate amount deducted
and withheld during the entire preceding year for the tax imposed under this
chapter.  At the time of filing that return, the employer shall pay over any
amount deducted and withheld during the preceding year and not previously
paid.  The employer shall make the annual report, to each employee and to the
Tax Commissioner, of the compensation paid and each tax withheld, as the Tax
Commissioner by rule shall prescribe.
      (9)   Each employer required to deduct and withhold any tax is liable for
the payment of that amount required to be deducted and withheld.
         (Ord. 89-675.  Passed 12-19-89.)
 
   (b)   Such employer in collecting such tax shall be deemed to hold the same
until payment is made by such employer to the City as a trustee for the benefit
of the City and any such tax collected by such employer from his employee
shall, until the same is paid to the City, be deemed a trust fund in the hands
of such employer.
 
   (c)   Provided, however, that no person shall be required to withhold the
tax on the wages or other compensation paid domestic servants employed
exclusively in or about such person's residence, but such servants shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
195.05.
 
   (d)   The officer or employee having control or supervision of or charged
with the responsibility of filing the return and making payment is personally
liable for failure to file the return or pay the tax due as required by this
section.  The officer or employee shall be personally liable for the tax he
failed to return or pay as well as any related interest and penalties.  The
dissolution of a corporation does not discharge an officer's or employee's
liability for a prior failure of the corporation to file returns or pay tax
due.
 
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the payment of taxes
by electronic funds transfer does not affect an employer's obligation to file
the returns as required under this Section
195.06.  The Director of Finance may adopt rules governing the format for
filing the returns under this Section
195.06 by employers who remit undeposited taxes by electronic funds transfer. 
The rules may permit the filing of returns at less frequent intervals than
required by subsection
195.06(a)(5) if the Director of Finance determines that remittance by
electronic funds transfer warrants less frequent filing of returns. Taxpayers
shall be permitted to make filings and remit tax payments using the Ohio
business gateway, and the Director of Finance shall adopt no rule which
conflicts with those rules adopted by the Tax Commissioner for the State of
Ohio governing use of the Ohio business gateway.
 
   (f)   The Director of Finance shall adopt rules governing the remittance of
taxes by electronic funds transfer as required under this Chapter.  The rules
shall govern the modes of electronic funds transfer and under what
circumstances each mode is acceptable, the content and format of electronic
funds transfers, the coordination of payment by electronic funds transfer and
filing of associated tax reports and returns, and any other matter that in the
opinion of the Director of Finance facilitates payment by electronic funds
transfer.  The Director of Finance may grant an exemption to an employer from
the duty to make payment by electronic funds transfer, upon application, for
such exemption by the employer and the employer's demonstration to the Director
of Finance that the requirement to make payment by electronic fund transfer
will impose a substantial hardship upon the employer.  The Director of Finance
may implement means of acknowledging, upon the request of a taxpayer, receipt
of tax remittances made by electronic funds transfer, and may adopt rules
governing acknowledgments.  The cost of acknowledging receipt of electronic
remittances shall be paid by the person requesting acknowledgment.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.07  DECLARATIONS.
   (a)   Every taxpayer or person who anticipates any taxable income which is
not subject to Section
195.06, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity, or
upon the request of the Commissioner of Taxation, shall file a realistic
declaration setting forth the taxpayer's estimated tax liability.
 
   (b)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year
during the life of this chapter, or within three and one-half months of the
date the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
 
   (c)   Such declaration shall be filed upon a form or forms furnished by, or
obtainable upon request from, the Commissioner of Taxation which form or forms
may require a statement that the figures used in making such declaration are
the figures used in making the declaration of the estimate for the federal
income tax adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable under the
provisions of this chapter. Taxpayers shall be permitted to make filings and
remit tax payments using the Ohio business gateway, and the Commissioner of
Taxation shall prescribe only such forms as are compatible with those rules
adopted by the Tax Commissioner for the State of Ohio governing use of the Ohio
business gateway.
 
   (d)   If the taxpayer is an individual, the taxpayer shall remit payment of
the taxpayer's estimated tax liability as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-two and one-half percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax
liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day
of April or the day on which the annual tax return for the prior year is
required to be filed disregarding any extension, whichever is later;
      (2)   Forty-five percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for
the current year shall be remitted on or before the thirty-first day of July;
      (3)   Sixty-seven and one-half percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax
liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the thirty-first
day of October;
      (4)   Ninety percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the
year referred to in subparagraph (d)(1), (2), and (3) of this section shall be
remitted on or before the thirty-first day of January.
   (e)   If the taxpayer is not an individual, the taxpayer shall remit payment
of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-two and one-half percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax
liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the day on which
the annual tax return for the prior year is required to be filed disregarding
any extension or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of
the fourth month of the taxpayer's fiscal year;
      (2)   Forty-five percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for
the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of June or,
in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the sixth month of
the taxpayer's taxable year;
      (3)   Sixty-seven and one-half percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax
liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day
of September or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of
the ninth month of the taxpayer's taxable year;
      (4)   Ninety percent of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the
current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of December or,
in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the twelfth month
of the taxpayer's taxable year.
 
   (f)   If upon the filing of the return required by Section
195.05, it appears that the taxpayer did not pay ninety percent (90%) of his
tax liability, as shown on such return, on or before January 31, the difference
between ninety percent (90%) of the taxpayer's tax liability and the amount of
estimated tax he actually paid on or before January 31, shall be subject to the
interest provisions of Section
195.10; however, any taxpayer:
      (1)   who is an individual who resides in the City but was not domiciled
in the City on the first day of January of the current calendar year; or
      (2)    who has remitted, pursuant to subparagraph (d) or (e) of this
section, an amount at least equal to one hundred percent of the taxpayer's tax
liability for the preceding year as shown on the return filed by the taxpayer
for the preceding year, provided that the return for the preceding year
reflected a twelve-month period and the taxpayer filed a return for the
preceding year;
shall not be assessed any interest for any increased taxes found to be due in
the current year.
 
   (g)   Those taxpayers having a fiscal year or period differing from the
calendar year shall file a declaration within three and one-half months after
the start of each fiscal year or period, accompanied by a payment of at least
the minimum remittance amount for the immediately preceding remittance date
specified in subparagraph (d) or (e) of this section, depending upon whether
the taxpayer is or is not an individual.
 
   (h)   Any amount deducted and withheld for taxes from the compensation of an
individual shall be considered as estimated taxes paid in equal amounts on each
of the payment dates prescribed by subparagraph (d) of this section.
 
   (j)   On or before the tax return due date prescribed in Section
195.05 for the year following that for which such declaration or amended
declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which
may be due the City shall be paid therewith in accordance with the provisions
of Section
195.05.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.08  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION; RECORDS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Taxation to collect and
receive the tax imposed by this chapter, in the manner prescribed by this
chapter, from the taxpayers.  It shall also be his duty to keep an accurate
record for a minimum of five years showing the amount received by him from each
taxpayer required to file a declaration and/or make a return and the date of
such receipt.  Records need not be kept longer than five years unless an
account is not paid in full, or unless an investigation is pending on an
account.
 
   (b)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed
a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Commissioner of
Taxation shall fix the amount of tax due the City from the taxpayer and shall
send to such taxpayer by first class mail a written statement showing the
amount of tax so fixed, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any.
 
   (c)   For good cause shown, the Commissioner of Taxation, with the
concurrence of a City Attorney, may  waive penalties and/or interest,
compromise a claim for taxes due and enter into payment agreements with
taxpayers.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.09  INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF COMMISSION OF TAXATION; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   The Commissioner of Taxation, or any employee authorized by the
Commissioner of Taxation, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers,
records and federal tax returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or other
person for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter.  Every such
employer, supposed employer, taxpayer, supposed taxpayer or other person is
hereby directed and required to furnish upon written order by the Commissioner
of Taxation, the means, facilities and opportunity for making such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
 
   (b)   The Commissioner of Taxation is hereby authorized to order any person
reasonably believed to have knowledge of the facts to appear before him and may
examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have
been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income,
and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and
federal tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as
parties or witnesses, whenever he reasonably believes such persons have
knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
 
   (c)   Whoever fails to comply with an order of the Commissioner of Taxation
issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
 
   (d)   Any information gained as the result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be
confidential, except for official purposes, or except in accordance with a
judicial order.  Any person knowingly and willfully divulging such information
in violation of this chapter, unless required to do so by Federal or State law,
shall, upon conviction therefore, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to a fine or penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).  Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense.  In addition
to the above penalties, any employee of the City who violates the provisions of
this section relative to disclosure of confidential information shall be
immediately dismissed from the service of the City, or if such employee is in
the classified civil service, proper removal charges shall immediately be
brought against such employee and other steps taken in conformity to the rules
and regulations of the Civil Service laws applicable thereto.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.10  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   All taxes due from taxpayers and moneys withheld by employers under
the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after they have become due
shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of the unpaid tax or
withholdings, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or part thereof.
 
   (b)   In addition to interest as provided in subsection (a) hereof,
penalties for nonpayment of taxes due from taxpayers, moneys required to be
withheld by employers under the provisions of this chapter, and for failure to
timely file tax returns are hereby imposed as follows:
      (1)   In the case of taxpayers upon whom such taxes are imposed, ten
percent (10%) of the amount of the unpaid tax if paid after the same has become
due; provided that penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax
assessment made by the Commissioner of Taxation when a return has been filed in
good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed herein; and
provided further, that neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any
additional tax assessment resulting from a Federal audit, providing an amended
return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three months after final
determination of the Federal tax liability.
      (2)   A.   In the case of employers required to withhold taxes from
employees under the provisions of this chapter, a penalty at the rate of:
 
Penalty (Percent) Tax Payment Relative to Due Date
10%               Within 30 days
15%               Within 60 days
20%               Within 90 days
25%               more than 90 days
         B.   A penalty is imposed on employers, required to remit withheld
taxes by electronic transfer who fail to make remittances by means of
electronic transfer as required under subsection
195.06(e) and (f), in the amount of 10 percent of the sum which the employer
was required to remit by electronic transfer.
            (Ord. 95-152.  Passed 5-2-95)
      (3)   In the case of taxpayers who fail to file tax returns when due as
required by this chapter, the following penalties:
 
Penalty Complete Tax Return
        is Filed
$25.00  Not more than 30 days late
$50.00  More than 30 but not more than 120 days late
$100.00 More than 120 days late
      (4)   Individuals not subject to the tax pursuant to this chapter for a
taxable year, not a resident of the City for an entire taxable year, under
eighteen years of age for the entire taxable year, or a member of the armed
forces of the United States for the entire taxable year shall not be subject to
the penalties imposed by this section for each taxable year in which one of the
conditions stated in this subsection (b)(4) applies.  Filings shall be deemed
to be timely made if postmarked by the due date.
         (Ord. 89-676.  Passed 12-19-89.)
 
195.11  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES.
   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are
recoverable.  No additional assessment of taxes shall be made after the period
described in Ohio R.C. 718.06, except in the case of fraud, omission of twenty-
five percent (25%) or more of the income subject to this tax, or failure to
file a return; unless that taxpayer has waived his rights under such Ohio
Revised Code Section; provided, however, in those cases in which the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the
federal statute of limitation, the period within which an additional assessment
may be made by the Commissioner of Taxation shall be three years from the time
of the final determination of the Federal tax liability.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.12  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any taxpayer or person who knowingly and willfully;
      (1)   Fails, neglects, or refuses to make any return or declaration
required by this chapter; or
      (2)   Makes any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return; or
      (3)   Fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the tax, penalties, or interest
imposed by this chapter; or
      (4)   Fails, neglects, or refuses to withhold the tax from his employees
or remit such withholding to the Commissioner of Taxation; or
      (5)   Refuses to disclose to the Commissioner of Taxation any information
with respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; or
      (6)   Fails, to comply with the provisions of this chapter; or
      (7)   Attempts to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of  the whole
or any part of the tax penalties or interest imposed by this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisoned not more than six months, or both,
for each offense.
 
   (b)   All prosecutions under this section shall be commenced within the time
specified in Ohio R. C. 718.12.
 
   (c)   The failure of any employer or taxpayer or person to receive or
procure a return, declaration, or other required form shall not excuse him from
making any information return, return or declaration, from filing such form, or
from paying the tax.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.13  INCOME TAX DIVISION; BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)  There is hereby established within the Finance Department of the City
an Income Tax Division, which Division shall be responsible for all matters
constituting the subject matter of this chapter. The Division, in addition to
the City Manager, shall consist of a Board of Review, as hereinafter defined, a
Commissioner of Taxation and such other officers and employees as may be
provided for by the City Commission.
 
   (b)   The Board of Review shall consist of the City Manager, Finance
Director, and the Law Director, or their respective designees.  The Board of
Review shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its
transactions.  The Board of Review may adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration,
operation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including
provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns and payments.
 
   (c)   The Board of Review shall adopt rules governing its procedures and
shall keep a record of its transactions.  Such records are not public records
available for inspection under Ohio Revised Code 149.43.  Hearings requested by
a taxpayer before the Board of Review are not meetings of a public body subject
to Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22.  All hearings by the Board of Review may
be conducted privately and the provisions of Section 195.09 with reference to
the confidential character of information required to be disclosed by the
chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before the Board of Review
on appeal.
 
   (d)   Whenever the Commissioner of Taxation issues a ruling or decision
regarding a municipal income tax obligation that is subject to appeal, as
provided in this Section or in an ordinance or regulation of the City, the
Commissioner of Taxation shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, at the same
time of the taxpayer's right to appeal the decision and of the manner in which
the taxpayer may appeal the decision.
 
   (e)   Any person aggrieved with any ruling or decision of the Commissioner
of Taxation which is made under the authority conferred by this chapter and who
has filed with the City the required returns or other documents pertaining to
the municipal income tax obligation at issue in the ruling or decision may
appeal therefrom to the Board of Review within thirty days from the
announcement of such ruling or decision by the Commissioner of Taxation and the
Board of Review shall, on hearing such ruling or decision, have jurisdiction to
affirm, reverse, and modify any such ruling or decision, or any part thereof.
 
   (f)   Appeals of the Board of Review shall be made in writing and shall
state why the ruling or decision of the Commissioner of Taxation should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful.  The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing
within forty-five days after receiving a written appeal, unless the taxpayer
waives a hearing.  If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may
appear before the Board of Review and may be represented by an attorney-at-law,
certified public accountant, or other representative.  The Board of Review may
affirm, reverse, or modify the Commissioner of Taxation's decision or any part
of that decision.  The Board of Review shall issue a final decision on the
appeal within ninety days after the Board of Review's final hearing on the
appeal, and send a copy of its final decision, by ordinary mail, to all of the
parties to the appeal within fifteen days after issuing its decision.  The
taxpayer or the Commissioner of Taxation may appeal the decision of the Board
of Review as provided in Ohio Revised Code Section 5717.011.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.14  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   (a)   Funds collected under the provisions of this Chapter shall be applied
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes levied by this Chapter and the costs of administering and
enforcing the provisions hereof.
      (2)   Such part thereof as if appropriated from time to time by the City
Commission for current operating expenses and capital improvements.  Provided,
however, that at least ten (10) percent of such proceeds shall be placed in the
permanent improvement funds of the City, and, as appropriated from time to
time, shall be used for, and only for, capital improvement purposes of the
City, including debt service charges on notes and bonds issued for capital
improvements of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (b)   The term “appropriated” as used in this section shall mean
appropriations made by the City Commission in the manner required by law and
the provisions of the City Charter.
(Ord. 04-365.  Passed 11-2-04 by election.)
 
195.15  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES OTHER CREDITS.
   (a)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the City but earned,
received, accrued or in any other way had set aside unto him net profits,
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation for work done or service
performed or rendered outside the City, if it is established that he has paid a
municipal income tax or a Joint Economic Development District income tax on
such net profits, salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation to another
municipality or to a Joint Economic Development district income tax, shall be
allowed a credit on the tax imposed by this chapter in an amount equal to fifty
percent (50%) of the tax so paid by him or on his behalf to such other
municipality or to a Joint Economic Development District income tax. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall such credit exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the tax assessed by this chapter on such net profits,
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation earned, received, accrued or
in any other way had set aside unto him in such other municipality or
municipalities or a Joint Economic Development District income tax where such
tax is paid.  There shall be no carry forward or carry backward of such tax
credit to any tax year other than the tax year in which the tax, upon which the
credit is based, was paid to such other municipality or municipalities or to a
Joint Economic Development income tax.
 
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section
195.11, or any other provisions inconsistent herewith, a claim for refund or
credit under this section shall be made in such manner as the Board of Review
may by regulation provide.  No such claim for refund or credit shall be allowed
unless made on or before the date for filing the taxpayer's final return,
unless such taxpayer's employer has filed with the Commissioner of Taxation a
record showing the tax withheld from such taxpayer's wages, salaries, or
commissions for other municipalities or for a Joint Economic Development
District income tax, and the taxpayer releases a City wage statement and such
other information as deemed necessary by the Commissioner of Taxation.
 
   (c)   Taxpayers shall be allowed the credits established under Ohio Revised
Code Sections 718.021, 718.121, and 718.14, but only to the extend as limited
by Ohio Revised Code Chapter 718.
(Ord. 03-381.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
195.16  SAVING CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against
an individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provision,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby
declared to be the intention of the City Commission that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence,
clause, section, or part thereof had not been included herein.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.17  DURATION OF LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of such taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid
and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of such taxes or the
punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully terminated,
subject to the limitations contained in Sections
195.11 and
195.12.
 
   (b)   All returns for all or any part of the last effective year of this
chapter shall be filed on or before the dates provided in Sections
195.05,
195.06, and
195.07 and any tax shown due thereon shall be paid by the dates provided in
such sections.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.18  AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The City Commission reserves the right to amend, supplement, or repeal
this chapter at any time.
 
   (b)   In the event that taxes collected under this chapter during the period
of imposition thereof exceed the existing and anticipated reasonable needs and
requirements of the City for the objects and purposes set forth in Section
195.14, the City Commission shall repeal this chapter or provide for a downward
revision of the tax rate as the circumstances may require.
(Ord. 86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
 
195.19  IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL TAX. 
   In addition to the tax provided for under Section
195.01, which is levied at a rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%), an
annual tax of one-half percent (1/2%) for the purposes specified in Section
195.01 hereof shall be imposed on and after July 1, 2000, and ending June 30,
2015.  Such tax shall be levied and collected in the same manner as the tax
provided for in Section
195.01.  Provided, however, that during the period that a tax levied on
salaries, wages, commissions, and other compensation and on net profits, is at
an aggregate rate of two percent (2%) or more, there shall be a reduction in
the tax levy upon the tax lists or duplicate of property listed for taxation
according to value for all the purposes of The City of Springfield, Ohio, of
2.7 mills less than the total number of mills levied in behalf of the City in
fiscal year 1975, beginning in fiscal year 2001 and for each year through
fiscal year 2015.
(Ord. 99-457.  Passed 5-4-99 by election.)
 
195.20  IMPOSITION OF SUPPLEMENTAL ADDITIONAL TAX.
   In addition to the tax provided for under Sections
195.03 and
195.19, an annual tax of one-half percent (1/2%) for the purposes specified in
Section
195.01 hereof shall be imposed on and after January 1, 1984, and ending
December 31, 1986.  Such tax shall be levied and collected in the same manner
as the tax provided for in Section
195.03.
(Ord.  86-459.  Passed 7-22-86.)
195.21  RENEWAL OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
   (a)    In addition to the tax provided for under Section
195.01, which is levied at a rate of one-and-one-half percent (1-1/2%), an
annual tax of one-half percent (1/2%) shall be imposed on and after July 1,
2015, and ending June 30, 2030. Such tax shall be levied and collected in the
same manner as the tax provided for in Section
195.01.  The proceeds of such tax shall be used for current operating expenses
and capital improvements; provided, however, that at least ten percent (10%) of
such proceeds shall be placed in the permanent improvement funds of the City,
and, as appropriated from time to time, shall be used for, and only for,
capital improvement purposes of the City, including debt service charges on
notes and bonds issued for capital improvements of The City of Springfield,
Ohio.
 
   (b)    During the period that a tax levied on salaries, wages, commissions,
and other compensation, and on net profits, is at an aggregate rate of two
percent (2%) or more, there shall be a limitation on the tax levy upon the tax
lists or duplicate of property listed for taxation according to value for all
the purposes of The City of Springfield, Ohio, to .6 (6/10) of a mill for each
one dollar of valuation through fiscal year 2030, without the approval of a
majority of electors voting upon such levy.
(Ord. 14-159  Passed 5-6-14 by electorate 3,249 for, 2,163 against.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 196
Municipal Income Tax on Earned Income
(Effective January 1, 2016 For taxable years beginning with taxable year 2016,
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 15-319, Passed December 8, 2015)
 
196.01
   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate.
196.011   Authority to levy tax.
196.012   Purposes of tax and tax rate.
196.013   Allocation of funds.
196.02   Effective date.
196.03   Definitions.
196.04   Income subject to tax for individuals.
196.041   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.
196.042   Domicile.
196.043   Exemption for certain judges.
196.05   Collection at source.
196.051   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.
196.052   Collection at source; occasional entrant.
196.06   Income subject to net profit tax.
196.061   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals.
196.062   Net profit; Income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment.
196.063   Consolidated federal income tax return.
196.064   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio.
196.065   Tax credits to foster job retention.
196.07   Declaration of estimated tax.
196.08   Credit for tax paid.
196.081   Credit for tax paid to other Ohio municipalities or to Ohio joint
economic development districts or joint economic development zones; Credit of
tax paid on income generated outside of Ohio.
196.082   Refundable credit for qualifying loss.
196.083   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.
196.09
   Annual return.
196.091   Return and payment of tax.
196.092   Return and payment of tax; Individuals serving in combat zone.
196.093   Use of Ohio business gateway; Types of filings authorized.
196.094   Extension of time to file.
196.095   Amended return.
196.096   Refunds.
196.10   Penalty, interest, fees, and charges.
196.11   Audit.
196.12   Rounding.
196.13
   Authority and powers of tax administrator.
196.131   Authority of tax administrator; administrative powers of the tax
administrator.
196.132   Authority of tax administrator;  compromise of claim and payment over
time.
196.133   Authority of tax administrator; right to examine.
196.134   Authority of tax administrator; requiring identifying information.
196.14   Confidentiality.
196.15   Fraud.
196.16   Opinion of the tax administrator.
196.17   Assessment; Appeal based on presumption of delivery.
196.18   Local board of tax review; Appeal to local board of tax review.
196.19   Actions to recover; Statute of limitations.
196.20   Adoption of regulations and rules.
196.97   Collection after termination of chapter.
196.98   Savings clause.
196.99   Violations; Penalty.
 
196.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
196.011 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.
   (A)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter
196 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The
tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter
196 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code 718 (ORC 718). This Chapter is
deemed to incorporate the provisions of ORC 718.
 
   (B)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter
196 are imposed through exercise of the City’s power of local government
granted to the City in Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution and
imposed in accordance with
Section 30 of the City’s Charter.
 
   (C)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the earned income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The City shall tax income at a
uniform rate. The tax is levied on Municipal Taxable Income, as defined herein.
 
196.012 PURPOSES OF TAX AND TAX RATE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied a tax at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and on net
profits, as here and after provided. Not more than nine-tenths of the proceeds
of the levy of such tax shall be used to provide funds for the purpose of
financing general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension
and enlargement of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements
of the City and not less than one-tenth of the proceeds of the levy of such tax
shall be used only to provide funds for the purpose of financing capital
improvements of the City. [This is the tax adopted in Ordinance 69-190 and
Ordinance 04-365. In this Chapter
196, this tax is referred to as "the tax provided for under Section
195.01"]
 
   (B)   In addition to the tax provided for under Section
195.01, which is levied at a rate of one-and-one-half percent (1-1/2%), and
referred to in the preceding subsection
196.012(A), an annual tax of one-half percent (1/2%) shall be imposed on and
after July 1, 2015, and ending June 30, 2030. Such tax shall be levied and
collected in the same manner as the tax provided for in Section
195.01 and as provided for in this Chapter
196. The proceeds of such tax shall be used for current operating expenses and
capital improvements; provided, however, that at least ten percent (10%) of
such proceeds shall be placed in the permanent improvement funds of the City,
and, as appropriated from time to time, shall be used for, and only for,
capital improvement purposes of the City, including debt service charges on
notes and bonds issued for capital improvements of The City of Springfield,
Ohio. [This is the tax adopted in Ordinance 14-159]
 
   (C)   In addition to the tax provided for under Section
196.012(A), which is levied at a rate of one-and-one-half percent (1-1/2%), and
referred to in the preceding subsection
196.012(A), and the tax provided for under Section
196.012(B) which is levied at the rate of one-half percent (1/2%), a tax at the
rate of four-tenths of one percent (0.4%) shall be imposed on and after July 1,
2017, and ending December 31, 2022. Such tax shall be levied on salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensation and on net profits, as here and after
provided, and collected in the same manner as the tax provided for in Section
195.01 and as provided for in this Chapter
196. The proceeds of such tax shall be used for public safety and other
operating expenses and street and other capital improvements; provided,
however, that at least ten percent (10%) of such proceeds shall be placed in
the permanent improvement funds of the City, and, as appropriated from time to
time, shall be used for, and only for, capital improvement purposes of the
City, including debt service charges on notes and bonds issued for capital
improvements of The City of Springfield, Ohio. [This is the tax adopted in
Ordinance 17-118]
 
   (D)    For any tax year ending in 2017, a taxpayer may calculate the tax due
under Chapter
196 of the Codified Ordinances by using 2.2% of the taxpayer’s Municipal
Taxable Income. [This paragraph adopted in Ordinance 17-118]
 
196.013 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Funds collected under the provisions of this Chapter shall be applied
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes levied by this Chapter and Chapter
195 and the costs of administering and enforcing the provisions hereof.
      (2)   Such part thereof as if appropriated from time to time by the City
Commission for current operating expenses and capital improvements. Provided,
however, that at least ten (10) percent of such proceeds shall be placed in the
permanent improvement funds of the City, and, as appropriated from time to
time, shall be used for, and only for, capital improvement purposes of the
City, including debt service charges on notes and bonds issued for capital
improvements of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (B)   The term "appropriated" as used in this section shall mean
appropriations made by the City Commission in the manner required by law and
the provisions of the City Charter.
 
196.02   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Ordinance 15-319, effective December 8, 2015, and corresponding
changes to ORC 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after
January 1, 2016. All provisions of this Chapter
196 apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
 
   (B)   Ordinance 15-319 does not repeal the existing sections of Chapter
195 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather provides for the levy,
collection and administration of the taxes adopted in Ordinances No. 69-190,
04-365 and No. 14-159 to comply with the requirements imposed in House Bill 5
adopted by the 130th General Assembly, effective January 1, 2016. For municipal
taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016, the City shall continue to
administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the City under ORC 718 and
ordinances and resolutions of the City as that Chapter
195 and those ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.
 
196.03  DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter
has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United
States relating to federal income taxation or in Title [57] LVII of the Ohio
Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. Except as
provided in ORC Section 718.81, if a term used in this chapter that is not
otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in Title [57] LVII
of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the
term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall
control over the use of the term in Title [57] LVII of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. No. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
   For purposes of this Section, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
 
   Except as otherwise provided in ORC Section 718.81, as used in this chapter:
 
(Ord. No. 17-285.  Passed 12-5-17.)
   (1)   "ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME," for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division 23(D) of this section, means a C corporation's federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
      (A)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (B)   Add an amount equal to five per cent of intangible income deducted
under division (1)(A) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (C)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
      (D)   (i)   Except as provided in division (1)(D)(ii) of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (ii)   Division (1)(D)(i) of this section does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (E)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
      (F)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
      (G)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under section 4313.02
of the Ohio Revised Code;
      (H)   Except as limited by divisions (1)(H)(ii), (iii) and (iv) of this
section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year
beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
         (i)   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net
profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce
municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net
operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years
following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for
more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
         (ii)   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (1)(H) of
this section to offset qualifying wages.
         (iii)   (a)   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021,
or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than fifty per cent of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by
division (1)(H)(i) of this section.
            (b)   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division (1)(H)(i) of this section.
         (iv)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
         (v)   Nothing in division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this
section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable
year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in
division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this section shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
      (I)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of
Section
196.063 of this Chapter.
      (J)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of Section
196.063 of this Chapter.
         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity
that has made the election described in division (47)(B) of this section, is
not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in
division (23)(D) of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer
were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid
or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless
such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as
payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United
States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-
employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         Nothing in division (1) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
   (2)   (A)   "ASSESSMENT" means any of the following:
         (i)   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation;
         (ii)   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under
Section
196.096 (B)(2) of this Chapter;
         (iii)   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section
196.062(B)(2) of this Chapter; or
         (iv)   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under Section
196.062(B)(3) of this Chapter.
         (v)   For purposes of division (2)(A)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of this
Section, an assessment shall commence the person's time limitation for making
an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to Section
196.18 of this Chapter, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital
letters at the top of such finding.
      (B)   "ASSESSMENT" does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under Section
196.096 (B)(3) of this Chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of
current or past-due balances owed to the City, a Tax Administrator's request
for additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical
errors, or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or
taxpayer that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (2)(A) of this
section.
   (3)   "AUDIT" means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
   (4)   "BOARD OF REVIEW" has same meaning as "Local Board of Tax Review".
   (5)   "CALENDAR QUARTER" means the three-month period ending on the last day
of March, June, September, or December.
   (6)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
   (7)   "CERTIFIED MAIL," "EXPRESS MAIL,""UNITED STATES MAIL,""POSTAL
SERVICE," and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (8)   "CITY" means The City of Springfield, Ohio. For purposes of this
Chapter, the term "City" is synonymous with the term "Municipality" as used in
ORC Chapter 718.
   (9)   "COMPENSATION" means any form of remuneration paid to an employee for
personal services.
   (10)   "DISREGARDED ENTITY" means a single member limited liability company,
a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
   (11)   "DOMICILE" means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer
to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
   (12)   "EXEMPT INCOME" means all of the following:
      (A)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
      (B)   Intangible income.
      (C)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (12)(C) of this section,
"unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (D)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
      (E)   Compensation paid under section 3501.28 or 3501.36 of the Ohio
Revised Code to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent
that such compensation does not exceed one thousand dollars for the taxable
year. Such compensation in excess of one thousand dollars for the taxable year
is not exempt. The City does not require the payer of such compensation to
withhold any tax from that compensation.
      (F)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
      (G)   Alimony and child support received.
      (H)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages.
      (I)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under section 5727.24 or 5727.30 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Division (12)(I) of this section does not apply for purposes of Chapter 5745 of
the Ohio Revised Code.
      (J)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
      (K)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income under
section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (L)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (34) of this section.
      (M)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air
force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force
and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is a resident or
domiciled in the City.
      (N)   An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of net profits of
the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net profits
that represents either (1) wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code or (2) net earnings from self-employment as defined in section
1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (O)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
eighteen years of age.
      (P)   (i)   Except as provided in divisions (12)(P)(ii), (iii), and (iv)
of this section, qualifying wages described in division (B)(1) or (E) of
Section
196.052 of this Chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the City under either of those divisions.
         (ii)   The exemption provided in division (12)(P)(i) of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
         (iii)   The exemption provided in division (12)(P)(i) of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under
division (D)(2) of Section
196.052 of this Chapter.
         (iv)   The exemption provided in division (12)(P)(i) of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
            (a)   For qualifying wages described in division (B)(1) of Section
196.052 of this Chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on
the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's
principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in
division (E) of Section
196.052 of this Chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on
the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;
            (b)   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (12)(P)(iv)(a) of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
      (Q)   (i)   Except as provided in division (12)(Q)(ii) or (iii) of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the City on not more than twenty
days in a taxable year.
         (ii)   The exemption provided in division (12)(Q)(i) of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
            (a)   The individual's base of operation is located in the City,
            (b)   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (12)(Q)
(ii)(b) of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer,"
and "public figure" have the same meanings as in Section
196.052 of this Chapter.
         (iii)   Compensation to which division (12)(Q) of this section applies
shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation.
If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be
treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
         (iv)   For purposes of division (12)(Q) of this section, "base of
operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
      (R)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for a
political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to section 709.023 of the Ohio
Revised Code on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such
taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation
because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the
municipal corporation of residence.
      (S)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
      Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (12) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-
through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity's income.
   (13)   "FORM 2106" means internal revenue service form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (14)   "GENERIC FORM" means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability,
including a request for refund.
   (15)   "INCOME" means the following:
      (A)   (i)   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (23)(D) of this section.
         (ii)   For the purposes of division (15)(A)(i) of this section:
            (a)   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (15)(A)(iv) of this section;
            (b)   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
         (iii)   Division (15)(A)(ii) of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' distributive shares of net
profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as
provided in division 12(N) of this Section.
         (iv)   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
      (B)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the City, including any net profit of the nonresident,
but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of
only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
      (C)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer.
      (D)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in
Section
196.081 of this Chapter.
   (16)   "INTANGIBLE INCOME" means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in Chapter 5701 of the Ohio Revised Code, and patents,
copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment
trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on
deferred compensation. "Intangible income" does not include prizes, awards, or
other income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
   (17)   "INTERNAL REVENUE CODE" means the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986,"
100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.
   (18)   "LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY" means a limited liability company formed
under Chapter 1705 of the OhioRevised Code or under the laws of another state.
   (19)   "LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW" and "BOARD OF TAX REVIEW" means the
entity created under Section
196.18 of this Chapter.
   (20)   "MUNICIPAL CORPORATION" means, in general terms, a status conferred
upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous
operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain,
police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
section 718.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74 of the OhioRevised Code.
   (21)   (A)   "MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME" means the following:
         (i)   For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or
sitused to the City under Section
196.062 of this Chapter.
            (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
         (ii)   For an individual who is a resident, income reduced by exempt
income to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in
division (21)(B) of this section.
         (iii)   For an individual who is a nonresident of the City, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the City under Section
196.062 of this Chapter, then reduced as provided in division (21)(B) of this
section.
      (B)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (21)(A)(ii)(a)
or (iii) of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct
such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's
performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation.
   (22)   "NET OPERATING LOSS" means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. "Net operating loss" does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
   (23)   (A)   "NET PROFIT" for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
      (B)   "NET PROFIT" for a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division (23)(B) of this section, the net operating loss carried forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (1)
(H) of this section.
      (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division (23)
(A) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net
profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
      (D)   (i)   For purposes of this chapter, "publicly traded partnership"
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A "publicly traded partnership" may have any
number of partners.
         (ii)   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any
other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described in division (23)(D) of this
section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall
not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
         (iii)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division (D)(iv) of this section.
         (iv)   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under division (D)(iii) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the
first taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An
election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year
following the last year of a five-year election period.
         (v)   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but division (D) of this section
applies to all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the
partnership resides.
         (vi)   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
   (24)   "NONRESIDENT" means an individual that is not a resident of the City.
   (25)   "OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY" means the online computer network system,
created under section 125.30 of the Ohio Revised Code, that allows persons to
electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any
successor electronic filing and payment system.
   (26)   "OTHER PAYER" means any person, other than an individual's employer
or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
   (27)   "PASS-THROUGH ENTITY" means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity" does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
   (28)   "PENSION" means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form.
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
   (29)   "PERSON" includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
   (30)   "POSTAL SERVICE" means the United States postal service, or private
delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon
delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
   (31)   "POSTMARK DATE," "DATE OF POSTMARK," and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
   (32)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
   (33)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
   (34)   "QUALIFYING WAGES" means wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
      (A)   Deduct the following amounts:
         (i)   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (ii)   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
         (iii)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
         (iv)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
         (v)   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
      (B)   Add the following amounts:
         (i)   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was
employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
         (ii)   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from
the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a
stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. Division (34)(B)(ii) of this section applies only to
those amounts constituting ordinary income.
         (iii)   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (34)(B)(iii) of this section applies only to employee contributions
and employee deferrals.
         (iv)   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
         (v)   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (vi)   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply:
            (a)   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that
is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            (b)   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages
as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            (c)   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
            (d)   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added
to wages pursuant to either division (34)(B) of this section or section 718.03
of the Ohio Revised Code, as that section existed before the effective date of
H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23, 2015.
   (35)   "RELATED ENTITY" means any of the following:
      (A)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's family
enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty per cent of the value of
the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
      (B)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty per cent of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
      (C)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (35)(D) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least fifty per cent of the value of the corporation's
outstanding stock;
      (D)   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (35)(A) to (C) of this section have been met.
   (36)   "RELATED MEMBER" means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty
per cent" shall be substituted for "5 percent" wherever "5 percent" appears in
section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (37)   "RESIDENT" means an individual who is domiciled in the City as
determined under Section
196.042 of this Chapter.
   (38)   "S CORPORATION" means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
   (39)   "SCHEDULE C" means internal revenue service schedule C (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (40)   "SCHEDULE E" means internal revenue service schedule E (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (41)   "SCHEDULE F" means internal revenue service schedule F (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (42)   "SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY" means a limited liability
company that has one direct member.
   (43)   "SMALL EMPLOYER" means any employer that had total revenue of less
than five hundred thousand dollars during the preceding taxable year. For
purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind,
including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains,
dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. "Small employer" does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
   (44)   "TAX ADMINISTRATOR" means the City’s employee designated by the
Finance Director and charged with direct responsibility for administration of
this Chapter, and also includes the following:
      (A)   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of the City to
administer this Chapter;
      (B)   A person retained by the City to administer this Chapter, but only
if the City does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency
basis;
      (C)   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
      (D)   “Tax Administrator” does not include the tax commissioner.
         (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
   (45)   "TAX RETURN PREPARER" means any individual described in section 7701
(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15 .
   (46)   "TAXABLE YEAR" means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (47)   (A)   "TAXPAYER" means a person subject to a tax levied on income by
the City in accordance with this chapter. "Taxpayer" does not include a grantor
trust or, except as provided in division (47)(B)(i) of this section, a
disregarded entity.
      (B)   (i)   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
            (a)   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
            (b)   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
            (c)   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of section 718.01 of the Ohio Revised Code as this
section existed on December 31, 2004.
            (d)   The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose
of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the
limited liability company or its single member.
            (e)   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of
business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the
election.
         (ii)   For purposes of division (47)(B)(i)(e) of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars.
   (48)   "TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES" means the rights provided to
taxpayers in sections 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38,
5717.011 , and 5717.03 of the Ohio Revised Code and any corresponding
ordinances of the City, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report,
withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Chapter
718. of the Ohio Revised Code and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by
a municipal corporation for the imposition and administration of a municipal
income tax.
   (49)   “TAX COMMISSIONER” means the tax commissioner appointed under section
121.03 of the Revised Code. 
(Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
196.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.
196.041 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   "Municipal Taxable Income" for a resident of the City is calculated as
follows:
      (1)   "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business
expense deduction as found in division (21)(B) of Section
196.03 of this Chapter, equals "Municipal Taxable Income".
         (a)   "Income" is defined in Section
196.03 (15) of this Chapter.
            (i)   "Qualifying Wages" is defined in Section
196.03(34).
            (ii)   "Net profit" is included in "income", and is defined in
Section
196.03 (23) of this Chapter. This section also provides that the net operating
loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as
provided in division (1)(H) of Section
196.03. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental
real estate is provided in Section
196.062(E).
            (iii)   Section
196.03(15) provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss
carryforward treatment in (15)(A)(ii)(a); resident’s distributive share of net
profit from pass through entity treatment in (15)(A)(ii)(b); treatment of S
Corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder in
(15)(A)(iii); restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for
use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in (15)(A)(iv).
            (iv)   "Pass Through Entity" is defined in Section
196.03(27).
         (b)   "Exempt Income" is defined in Section
196.03 (12) of this Chapter.
         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in
(21)(B) of Section
196.03 of this Chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in that
section.
         (d)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
 
   (B)   "Municipal Taxable Income" for a nonresident of the City is calculated
as follows:
      (1)   "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused
to the City as provided in Section
196.062 of this Chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in (21)(B) of Section
196.03 of this Chapter, equals "Municipal Taxable Income".
         (a)   "Income" is defined in Section
196.03(15) of this Chapter.
            (i)   "Qualifying Wages" is defined in Section
196.03(34).
            (ii)   "Net profit" is included in "income", and is defined in
Section
196.03(23) of this Chapter. This section also provides that the net operating
loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as
provided in division (1)(H) of Section
196.03. "Net profit" for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of
the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of
only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
            (iii)   "Pass Through Entity" is defined in Section
196.03(27).
         (b)   "Exempt Income" is defined in Section
196.03(12) of this Chapter.
         (c)   "Apportioned or sitused to the City as provided in Section
196.062 of this Chapter" includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in the City. Treatment of net
profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided
in Section
196.062(E).
         (d)   "Allowable employee business expense deduction" as described in
(21)(B) of Section
196.03 of this Chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
For a nonresident of the City, the deduction is limited to the extent the
expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the nonresident
in the City.
         (e)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
 
196.042 DOMICILE.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the City for all or
part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the City on the last
day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax Administrator
reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the City for all or
part of the taxable year.
      (2)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile if the
individual establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual
was not domiciled in the City for all or part of the taxable year.
 
   (B)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in
the City for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
      (3)   The address on the individual's driver's license;
      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual;
      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the
individual's residency;
      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation or state where the educational institution is located;
      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the City. For
the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact period" with the
City if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode located
outside of the City and while away overnight from that abode spends at least
some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the City. For
purposes of this section, the State’s contact period test or bright-line test
and resulting determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
 
   (C)   All applicable factors are provided in Ohio Revised Code Section
718.012.
 
196.043 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN JUDGES.
   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of Columbus shall
levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court
received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or Justice. Only
the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the income of a
judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a district
court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the district,
received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
 
196.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
196.051 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.
   (A)   (1)    Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the City shall withhold from each employee an amount equal to
the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the City
multiplied by the applicable rate of the City’s income tax, except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under Section
196.052 of this Chapter or division (D) or (F) of this section. An employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from
qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of the employee.
      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division (A)
(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also
deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the City when the
employee is a resident.
 
   (B)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the City the greater of the income taxes deducted and
withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the
employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the Tax
Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following schedule:
         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) or (B)(1)(c) of this section of taxes
required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax
Administrator not later than the last day of the month following the last day
of each calendar quarter.
         (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the City in the preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand three
hundred ninety-nine dollars, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the City in any
month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred dollars. Payments
under division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall be made to the Tax Administrator
not later than fifteen days after the last day of each month.
         (c)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
semimonthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld
or required to be deducted on behalf of the Municipality in the preceding
calendar year exceeded eleven thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars, or if
the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the Municipality in any month of the preceding calendar
year exceeded one thousand dollars. The payment under division (B)(1)(c) of
this section shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than one of the
following:
            (i)   If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld during the first fifteen days of a month, the third
banking day after the fifteenth day of that month;
            (ii)   If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld after the fifteenth day of a month and before the first
day of the immediately following month, the third banking day after the last
day of that month.
               (Ord. No. 16-244, passed 8-30-16.)
         (d)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is required to
make payment by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes
deducted and withheld on behalf of the employee for remittance to the City if
the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required to make payments
electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes withheld on payments to
employees under section 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1,
or any other federal statute or regulation. The payment of tax by electronic
funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's, agent's, or
other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this section.
Once the threshold for remitting payment electronically for federal purposes
has been met, any accrued municipal income tax withheld from employee
qualifying wages earned within the City shall be remitted to the City at the
same time that the federal tax withholding payment is due.
 
   (C)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file
a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other
payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the City as the return required of an employee
whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages
reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
unless the City requires all resident individual taxpayers to file a tax return
under section
196.091 of this Chapter,
 
   (D)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's
successor entity.
 
   (E)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
remit to the City the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
 
   (F)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
 
   (G)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the City until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
 
   (H)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall
file a Withholding Reconciliation Return with the Tax Administrator listing the
names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose
qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the City
during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if any, from
each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying wages paid
to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of every other
municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been withheld
from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other information
required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service
form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other
information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
 
   (I)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
 
   (J)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting
qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the
employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
 
   (K)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at
the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this Chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
 
196.052 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.
   (A)   The following terms as used in this section:
      (1)   "Employer" includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
      (2)   "Professional athlete" means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
      (3)   "Professional entertainer" means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
      (4)   "Public figure" means a person of prominence who performs services
at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events,
for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
      (5)   "Fixed location" means a permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
      (6)   "Worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than
twenty days during the calendar year. "Worksite location" does not include the
home of an employee.
      (7)   "Principal place of work" means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place of work" means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of work" means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's
employer.
         (a)   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(1)(a) of this section among those two
or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(B)(2) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for
"municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.
 
   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C), (E), (F), and (G) of this section, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in the City if the
employee performed such services in the City on twenty or fewer days in a
calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
         (a)   The employee's principal place of work is located in the City.
         (b)   The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite
locations in the City. For the purposes of this division, "presumed worksite
location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state
at which the employer provides services that can reasonably be expected by the
employer to last more than twenty days in a calendar year. Services can
"reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty days" if
either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
            (i)   The nature of the services are such that it will require more
than twenty days of actual services to complete the services;
            (ii)   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services
at the location for more than twenty days.
         (c)   The employee is a resident of the City and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in
section
196.051 of this Chapter.
         (d)   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure within the City.
      (2)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, an employee
shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the City only if
the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of the
employer in the City than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For
the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal
place of work:
         (a)   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
         (b)   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
         (c)   Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick
up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has
been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed,
remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
         (d)   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)(2)
(c) of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee
does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned,
used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
         (e)   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
 
   (C)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with ORC Chapter
718, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (B)(1)
of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying
wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal
place of work is located.
 
   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the City exceeds the twenty-day threshold described in
division (B)(1) of this section, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to
the City for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer
pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in the
City.
      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the City under
division (D)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for the City for the
first twenty days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in the City.
      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division (D)(2) of
this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those
first twenty days to the City, if the City is where the employee's principal
place of work is located but is not the employee’s domicile, are refundable to
the employee.
 
   (E)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in the City, an employer shall withhold
municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a taxable
year and remit that tax only to the City if the employer's fixed location is
located in the City and if the employer qualifies as a small employer as
defined in Section
196.03 of this Chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small
employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
 
   (F)   Divisions (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of section
196.051 of this Chapter.
 
196.06  INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.
196.061 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.
   "Municipal Taxable Income" for a taxpayer who is not an individual is
calculated as follows:
   (A)   "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent otherwise included
in income, multiplied by apportionment, equals "Municipal Taxable Income".
      (1)   "Income" for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the "Net
Profit" of the taxpayer.
         (a)   "Net Profit" for a person other than an individual is defined in
Section
196.03(23).
         (b)   "Adjusted Federal Taxable Income" is defined in Section
196.03(1) of this Chapter.
      (2)   "Exempt Income" is defined in Section
196.03(12) of this Chapter.
      (3)   "Apportionment" means the apportionment as determined by Section
196.062 of this Chapter.   
      (4)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
 
196.062 NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in
the City unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the City or the
taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone company that is
subject to and required to file reports under Chapter 5745 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
   (A)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the City shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the City for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. As used in
the preceding sentence, tangible personal or real property shall include
property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall
be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the City to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are notrequired to be withheld under section
196.052 of this Chapter;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the City to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (B)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (A) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
the City, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the City may
require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
         (a)   Separate accounting;
         (b)   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         (c)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
City;
         (d)   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (A) of Section
196.19 of this Chapter.
      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by division
(A) of Section
196.19 of this Chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in division (B) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
   (C)   As used in division (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         (a)   The employer;
         (b)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         (c)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (2) of this section solely
in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If a
Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
   (D1)   For tax years beginning January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2017,
for the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and
rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation
as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
         (a)   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         (b)   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from
a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion.
         (c)   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
City to the extent that such services are performed in the City.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the City based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the City.
      (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
   (D2)   For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018, for the purposes
of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and
services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes,
the property meets either of the following criteria:
         (a)   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         (b)   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from
a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion.
            (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
   (E)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of
real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned
by the individual shall be subject to tax under this Chapter provided the
property generating the net profit is located in the City or the City is the
municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net
profit resides. The City shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate
accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this
division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
   (F)   (1)   Except as provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the City provided the
real estate is located in the City. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to the City based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of
real estate located in the City to the commissions received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
      (2)   An individual who is a resident of the City shall report the
individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the individual
paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the extent that
such credit is allowed under Section
196.081 of this Chapter.
   (G)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amunt or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation
under divisions (12)(L) and (34)(A)(iv) of Section
196.03 of this Chapter, by the City, to which the taxpayer has apportioned a
portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt
from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to the City. In
no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was
apportioned to the City any amount other than the amount upon which the
employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock
option not exempted from taxation.
      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to
the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to the City under
this section.
   (H)   When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
 
196.063 CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated
federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (A)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in
section 4927.01 of the Revised Code.
      (5)   "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in
section 5727.01 of the Revised Code.
   (B)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year.
         (a)   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under federal law.
         (b)   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-
year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (B)(2) of this section; or
         (c)   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (B)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018, when a
taxpayer makes the election allowed under section 718.80 of the Revised Code, a
valid election made by the taxpayer under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section is binding upon the tax commissioner for the remainder of the five-year
period. 
         (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
      (5)   For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018, when an
election is made under section 718.80 of the Revised Code is terminated, a
valid election made under section 718.86 of the Revised Code is binding upon
the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.
         (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
   (C)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the City. A taxpayer that is required to file a
consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent taxable years
unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax
Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change
in circumstances.
   (D)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2), (3), and (4)
of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in section
196.03(1) of this Chapter, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable
income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears
in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for
"a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (1) of 196.03 of
this Chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year,
the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one
of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss
for that taxable year:
      (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
196.062 of this Chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the
basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (b)   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
196.062 of this Chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year,
all of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in Section
196.062 of this Chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation;
         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (F)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
make the computations required under Section
196.062 of this Chapter by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in
that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for
"taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (G)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this
chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a
member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such
an affiliated group.
   (H)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
 
196.064 TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO.
   The City, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the City. If
a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of
the new income tax revenue the City derives from new employees of the taxpayer
and shall be for a term not exceeding fifteen years. Before the City passes an
ordinance granting a credit, the City and the taxpayer shall enter into an
agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
 
196.065 TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.
   The City, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job
retention in the City. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be
measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the City derives from the
retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding
fifteen years. Before the City passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the
City and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the
conditions of the credit.
 
196.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability to the City for income tax imposed
under this Chapter for the current taxable year.
      (2)   "Tax liability" means the total taxes due to the City for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
 
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars. For the
purposes of this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division,
"date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         (d)   [Intentionally Left Blank]
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under division
(G) of Section
196.091 of this Chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the
first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
 
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the City or Tax
Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and
withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half per cent of the tax
liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, forty-five per cent of the tax liability for the
taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half per cent of the tax
liability for the taxable year;
         (d)   For tax years beginning January 1, 2016, through December 31,
2017, on or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year,
ninety per cent of the tax liability for the taxable year.
            (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
         (e)   For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018, for an
individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the first month of the following
taxable year, ninety per cent of the tax liability for the taxable year.  For a
person other than an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth
month of the taxable year, ninety per cent of the tax liability for the taxable
year.  
            (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (C)(1)(a) through
(d) of this section.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with section
196.091 of this Chapter.
         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals
and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is
due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to division (G) of section 5747.08 of the Revised Code.
         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may eitherincrease or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
 
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to Section
196.10 of this Chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two
and one-half per cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five
per cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven
and one-half per cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment;
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety per
cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
 
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety
per cent of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one
hundred per cent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for
the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable
year reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a return with
the municipal corporation under Section
196.091 of this Chapter for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the City but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
 
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
 
196.08  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.
 
196.081 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER OHIO MUNICIPALITIES OR TO OHIO JOINT
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS OR JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ZONES; CREDIT OF
TAX PAID ON INCOME GENERATED OUTSIDE OF OHIO.
   (A)   Every individual who resides in the City but who receives net profits,
qualifying wages, or other municipal taxable income for work done or services
performed or rendered in Ohio but outside the City, and who is liable to and
has paid to another municipality or a joint economic development zone created
under section 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under
section 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 of the Ohio Revised Code an income tax on the
same income taxable and taxed under this Chapter, shall be allowed a credit in
an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the tax levied by the other Ohio
municipality or an Ohio joint economic development zone created under section
715.691 or an Ohio joint economic development district created under section
715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 of the Ohio Revised Code. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in no event shall such credit exceed fifty percent (50%) of the tax
imposed by this chapter on the same income. There shall be no carry forward or
carry backward of such tax credit to any tax year other than the tax year in
which the tax was paid to such other Ohio municipality or an Ohio joint
economic development zone created under section 715.691 or an Ohio joint
economic development district created under section 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72
of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (B)   Taxpayers shall be allowed the credits established under Ohio Revised
Code Sections 718.021, 718.121, but only to the extent as limited by Ohio
Revised Code Chapter 718.
 
   (C)   Taxpayers are allowed a nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed
under this Chapter on income generated outside of Ohio, with the credit to be
in the amount of 100% of the non-Ohio municipality authorized tax paid on that
same income in the authorizing non-Ohio municipality in which the income was
generated; provided the tax for which the credit is claimed is of the same
nature or having the same practical effect as the tax imposed under this
Chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall such credit exceed
one hundred percent (100%) of the tax. imposed by this chapter on the same
income. The burden of proof is on the taxpayer to show that the tax for which
the taxpayer claims a credit is of the same nature or having the same practical
effect as the tax imposed under this Chapter and that the tax for which the
taxpayer claims a credit was imposed on the same income taxed by the City
against which the taxpayer is claiming a credit. The section applies only to
income generated in the United States of America and is intended to and limited
to preventing a violation of the Commerce Clause of the United States
Constitution as prohibited in Comptroller of the Treasury of Maryland v. Wynne,
575 U.S. __ 135 S.Ct. 1787, 191 L.Ed.2d 813, 25 Fla.L.Weekly Fed. S 233. (2015)
 
196.082 REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Nonqualified deferred compensation plan" means a compensation plan
described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this section,
"qualifying loss" means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized
for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as
compensation with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of money and property
attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
         (b)   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to
one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (A)(2)(a) of this
section computed without regard to division (A)(2)(b) of this section and a
fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which
the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the
denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   "Qualifying tax rate" means the applicable tax rate for the taxable
year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with
respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different
tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate"
is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall
be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect
to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
 
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a refundable
credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal
corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable
year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying
loss and the qualifying tax rate.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the
credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be
calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate share of
the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
 
   (D)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
      (2)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
 
196.083 CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the City, but should
have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is allowable by
the City as a refund, but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds as
provided in Section
196.096 of this Chapter.
 
   (B)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the City, but
was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall be subject to
collection and recovery by the City. To the extent a refund of such tax or
withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as provided in section
196.096, the City will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the City
claims is due. If the City’s tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net
difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection by the City, along
with any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment.
 
   (C)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in Section
196.096 of this Chapter.
 
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires a City to allow credit for tax paid
to another municipal corporation if the City has reduced credit for tax paid to
another municipal corporation. Section
196.081 of this Chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
 
196.09  ANNUAL RETURN.
196.091 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
Municipal Taxable Income by the City shall be completed and filed by every
taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer located in the City under subsection
196.051(C) of this Chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the City.
      (3)   All resident individuals, eighteen years of age and older during
any part of a tax year, shall file an annual municipal income tax return for
such tax year with the City, regardless of income or liability.
      (4)   A resident who is age 65 or older and has no taxable income in the
year for which a return would otherwise be due and no taxable income in the
immediately preceding three (3) years, need not file a return.
 
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
 
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the City in accordance with this chapter, the return or notice
required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person
charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly
authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with
the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are
authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice
shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information
including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent,
guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person.
 
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address, and phone number of the fiduciary.
 
   (E)   Spouses may file a joint return.
 
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each
annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal
Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all information
reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service
form 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any
other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments
made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with
each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-
REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio business gateway or a
portal provided by City.
      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the City to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (F) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
 
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under division
(G) of section 5747.08 of the Ohio Revised Code. The taxpayer shall complete
and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or
on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the City or Tax
Administrator.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and
file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on
generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the City or Tax
Administrator.
         (c)   In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed
by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a
taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is ten dollars or less.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the City in accordance with this chapter, the
Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments
otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise
required to file annual returns.
      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom Section
196.092 of this Chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this
division conflicts with any provision in Section
196.092 of this Chapter, the provision in Section
196.092 of this Chapter prevails.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the City shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount due
is ten dollars or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the City for a taxable
year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section shall file with the City an
annual net profit return under division (F)(3) and (4) of this section.
 
   (I)   (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to
be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on
or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period
or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
"The date of postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the
timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment. For
purposes of this section, "receiving that payment" refers to the transfer of
funds from the account of the taxpayer. Such funds are no longer under the
control of the taxpayer once the timestamp has occurred.
 
   (J)   The amounts withheld for the City by an employer, the agent of an
employer, or other payer as described in section
196.051 of this Chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation
as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the
amounts withheld were not remitted to the City and the recipient colluded with
the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
amounts withheld.
 
   (K)   Each return required by the City to be filed in accordance with this
section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return. The return
or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the return, to contact
the Tax Administrator for information about the examination or other review of
the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond
to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer
or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not
preclude the Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such
matters.
 
   (L)   The Tax Administrator of the City shall accept for filing a generic
form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the City in
accordance with this Chapter, provided that the generic form, once completed
and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinances, resolutions,
or rules adopted by the City or Tax Administrator, and provided that the
taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with
the provisions of this Chapter and of the City’s Ordinance or resolution
governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
 
   (M)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
 
   (N)   (1)   As used in this division, "worksite location" has the same
meaning as in section
196.052 of this chapter.
      (2)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the City for a taxable year if both of
the following N2(a) and N2(b) conditions apply:
         (a)   The person was required to file a tax return with the City for
the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at
a worksite location within the City, and the person has filed all appropriate
and required returns and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding
payments as provided by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to
accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of
this chapter.
         (b)   The person no longer provides services in the City, and does not
expect to be subject to the City’s income tax for the taxable year.
         (c)   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the City. The affidavit also shall include
the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any services
within The City of Springfield, Ohio, make any sales in The City of
Springfield, Ohio, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by The City of
Springfield, Ohio during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject
to the tax levied by The City of Springfield, Ohio for the taxable year, the
affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a
taxpayer with The City of Springfield, Ohio, if such a registration is required
by The City of Springfield, Ohio’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules." The
person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         (d)   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (N)(2) of
this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any
tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to the City in the taxable year.
It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of
this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income
on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed
with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in division (N) of
this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the
person.
            (Ord. No. 16-244, passed 8-30-16.)
 
196.092 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.
   (A)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the City for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the City in accordance with this chapter during
the period of the member's or civilian's duty service and for one hundred
eighty days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one
hundred eightieth day after the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An
applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers
necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
 
   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(B)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms
as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the City before the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (B)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by the City in accordance with this
chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this
section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section,
"qualifying taxpayer" means a member of the national guard or a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
         (b)   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension
period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of
the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
 
   (D)   For each taxable year to which division (A), (B), or (C) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (3) or
(C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
 
196.093 USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the
taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
 
   (B)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
 
   (C)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
 
   (D)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by taxpayers, or other persons
does not affect the legal rights of the City or taxpayers as otherwise
permitted by law.
 
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the
authority of the City to administer, audit, and enforce the provisions of its
municipal income tax.
 
196.094 EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.
   (A)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due
date of the municipal income tax return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth
month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
 
   (B)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for a
period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
 
   (C)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
 
   (D)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of
the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of
that date.
 
   (E)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under division (G) of section 5747.08 of the
Ohio Revised Code, a taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the
filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal
income tax return shall be the same as the extended due date of the state
income tax return.
 
196.095 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the City in accordance with this
chapter must be altered.
      (2)   Within sixty days after the final determination of any federal or
state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is ten dollars or less.
      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as
provided under division (B)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless the
applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under
section
196.19 of this Chapter has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (A)(2) of this
section for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars or less, no refund
need be paid by the City to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in division (C)
(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in section
196.096 of this Chapter. Except as set forth in division (C)(2) of this
section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or
attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
 
196.096 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the
City, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of
employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the City:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than ten dollars;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten
dollars.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and / or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (B)
(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under Section
196.18 of this Chapter.
 
   (C)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (B) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
 
   (D)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within ninety days after the final filing date of the annual return or
ninety days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no
interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the
payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year
shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return on
which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for
filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in
division (A)(4) of Section
196.10 of this Chapter.
 
   (E)   As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same meaning as in
section
196.10 of this Chapter.
 
196.10  PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Applicable law" means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the City provided such
resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   "Federal short-term rate" means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of
the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   "Income tax," "estimated income tax," and "withholding tax" mean
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the City
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   "Interest rate as described in division (A) of this section" means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
five percent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the
July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in
accordance with division (A)(2) of this section.
      (5)   "Return" includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or the City by
a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   "Unpaid estimated income tax" means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   "Unpaid income tax" means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   "Unpaid withholding tax" means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   "Withholding tax" includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
 
   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to the City on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016.
 
   (C)   The City imposes on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer,
and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest amounts and
penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to
make to the City timely and full payment or remittance of income tax, estimated
income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the City any return
required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate, per annum, set out in
Section
196.10(A)(4), above, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and
unpaid withholding tax. This imposition of interest shall be assessed per
month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty not exceeding
fifty percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
         (Ord. 17-285. Passed 12-5-17.)
      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the City imposes a monthly penalty of twenty-five dollars for each failure to
timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each
month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled
regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed a total
of one hundred fifty dollars in assessed penalty for each failure to timely
file a return.
 
   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the City shall not impose, seek to collect, or collect any
penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not described in this
section.
 
   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the City shall not refund or credit any penalty, amount of
interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or collected
before January 1, 2016.
 
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, with the concurrence of the Law Director,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
by the Tax Administrator and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who
received benefit of such abatement or partial abatement.
 
   (G)   The City may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the City’s post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney’s fees.
 
196.11  AUDIT.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in Section
196.03(3) of this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer
a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer
during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including any right
to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of
an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is
considered to have commenced.
 
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
 
   (C)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. A
taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an
audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer's
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division does
not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
 
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
 
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
 
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
 
196.12  ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part
of a dollar that is less than fifty cents shall be dropped, rounding down to
the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a
document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document.
 
196.13  AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
 
196.131 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions
necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this Chapter,
including without limitation:
   (A)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers
referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the Tax
Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under this Chapter;
   (B)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
   (C)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
   (D)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
   (E)   Exercise the authority provided by law, with the concurrence of the
Law Director, relative to consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax
claims;
   (F)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with section
196.062 of this Chapter;
   (G)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax
Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has
made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by
the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
   (H)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
   (I)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in section
196.051 of this Chapter.
 
196.132 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT OVER
TIME.
   (A)    As used in this section, "claim" means a claim for an amount payable
to the City that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
 
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is
in the best interests of the City:
      (1)   Compromise a claim, with the concurrence of the Law Director;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
 
   (C)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
 
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
 
   (E)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator, with the concurrence of the Law Director,
may determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will
be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time
agreement.
 
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed
financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a
payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure to
provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall
preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
 
196.133 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may
examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of
any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this Chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this Chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
 
   (B)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this Chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the City or for the withholding of such
tax.
 
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's possession
or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
 
   (D)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal and stateincome tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
 
196.134 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person's social security number, federal employer identification
number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
 
   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to section
196.10 of this Chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in
section
196.99 of this Chapter.
      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (A) of this section
within thirty days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to section
196.10 of this Chapter.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this
section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with
respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to
any applicable criminal penalties described in section
196.99 of this Chapter for a violation of section
196.15 of this Chapter and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax
Administrator by law.
 
196.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by ORC 718 or by the charter
or ordinance of the City is confidential, and no person shall access or
disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or
in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the
official business of the City as authorized by ORC 718 or the charter or
ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the City or a designee
thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this
chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the
State Tax Commissioner, and Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations.
 
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the City from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
 
196.15  FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend,
or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment
of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud the City or the Tax Administrator.
 
196.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An "opinion of the Tax Administrator" means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
 
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an "opinion of the Tax Administrator" and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and (H) of this
section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer's request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts.
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the City in accordance with
this Chapter.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator."
 
   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the City’s income
tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of
the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
state law, or the City’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material facts
or circumstances;
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
 
   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the City in order to obtain a
more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of section
196.15 of this Chapter.
 
   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
 
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
 
   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
 
   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
 
   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
 
   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under subsection (F) may not be appealed.
 
196.17  ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under
section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within sixty
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in Section 718.18 of the Revised Code is prima
facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery
and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an
address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator
originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty percent, as determined by voting
rights, of the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within sixty
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
 
196.18  LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the City shall maintain a Local
Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in OhioRevised Code Chapter
718.
      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the City, and may
not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the City at any time
during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of
appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top administrative official
of the City. This member may be an employee of the City, but may not be the
director of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other
similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or
any direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the City shall be two years. There is no limit on
the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by
the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the top administrative
official of the City shall serve at the discretion of the administrative
official.
      (4)   Members of the board of tax review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in Section
718.11(A)(4) of the Revised Code.
      (5)   A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within sixty days of when the vacancy was created.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member’s
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
 
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed,
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
 
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within sixty days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
 
   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within sixty days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C)
of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or
waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may
appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within one hundred twenty days after the first
day of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
 
   (E)   The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator's
assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within ninety days after the board’s final hearing
on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to
all of the parties to the appeal within fifteen days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the board's
final determination as provided in section 5717.011 of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under section 149.43 of the Ohio Revised Code. For
this reason, any documentation, copies of returns or reports, final
determinations, or working papers for each case must be maintained in a secure
location under the control of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local
Board of Tax Review may remove such documentation, copies of returns or
reports, final determinations, or working papers from the hearing. Hearings
requested by a taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to
this section are not meetings of a public body subject to section 121.22 of the
Ohio Revised Code. For this reason, such hearings shall not be open to the
public, and only those parties to the case may be present during the hearing.
 
196.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            (i)   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            (ii)   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, "qualifying deferral period" means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in Section
196.18 of this Chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the
Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
 
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of twenty-five per cent or more of income
required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after
the commission of the offense.
 
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in Section
196.096 of this Chapter.
 
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the City does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under Section
196.18 of this Chapter, of the Ohio board of tax appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the Ohio board of tax appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant's
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by Section
196.096 of this Chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by division
(D) of this section.
 
   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
 
196.20  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS AND RULES.
   (A)   The City Commission may adopt regulations to administer the income tax
imposed under this Chapter.
 
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may adopt rules consistent with the terms of
this chapter to facilitate administration of this Chapter.
 
   (C)   All regulations and rules adopted under this section shall be
published and posted on the internet.
 
196.97  COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in Section
196.19.
 
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Section
196.091 as though the same were continuing.
 
196.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of the City that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included in this chapter.
 
196.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever violates
Section
196.15 of this Chapter, division (A) of Section
196.14 of this Chapter, or Section
196.051 of this Chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and
withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the
violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment,
or both.
 
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Sec. 7213(a), 7213A, or
7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a
fine of not more than five thousand dollars plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the
violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment,
or both.
 
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (A) of
Section
196.14 of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense.
 
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree; on each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. By way of an illustrative
enumeration, violations of this Chapter shall include but not be limited to the
following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this Chapter; or
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return; or
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this Chapter; or
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the City income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the City as required by Section
196.051; or
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees; or
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer; or
      (7)    Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits; or
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information; or
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of
estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable
year in accordance with this Chapter; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this Chapter.
 
   (E)   For purposes of this Section, any violation that does not specify a
culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation.
 
   (F)   For purposes of this Section, the term "person" shall, in addition to
the meaning prescribed in Section
196.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity
or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer
within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision
over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax
returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
Chapter.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 197
Hotel Excise Tax
 
197.01   Definitions.
197.02   Levy of tax; rate.
197.03   Consumer to pay tax; collection and reporting of tax by vendor.
197.04   Records.
197.05   Monthly return by vendor; payments.
197.06   Late penalty.
197.07   Sale of entire business; successor liabilities.
197.08   Tax paid by consumer.
197.09   Vendor to collect tax; rebate prohibited.
197.10   Filing reports and returns.
197.11   268 Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Fund.
197.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to levy - see Ohio R.C. 5739.08, 5739.09
 
197.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)    "Person" includes individuals, receivers, assignees, trustees in
bankruptcy, estates, firms, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
joint ventures, clubs, societies, corporations and combinations of individuals
of any form.
 
   (b)    "Sale" and "selling" means all transactions occurring within the City
of Springfield, Ohio, occurring on and after August 1, 1978, by which lodging
by a hotel is or is to be furnished to transient guests.
 
   (c)    "Vendor" means the person by whom lodging is or is to be furnished by
a hotel pursuant to any sale.
 
   (d)    "Consumer" means the person to whom lodging by a hotel is or is to be
furnished pursuant to any sale.
 
   (e)    "Hotel" means every establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised
or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are
offered to guests, in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation
of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or several structures.
 
   (f)    "Transient guests" means persons occupying a room or rooms for
sleeping accommodations for less than thirty consecutive days.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
197.02  LEVY OF TAX; RATE.
   (a)    For the purpose of providing revenue for the use of the general fund
of the City, an excise tax is hereby levied on each sale made in this City. The
tax hereby levied is three percent (3%) of the price involved in each sale.
 
   (b)    Beginning January l, 1990 an excise tax in addition to the tax
described in subsection (a) of this section is hereby levied on each sale made
in this City at the rate of three percent (3%) of the price involved in each
sale. Such additional tax is levied pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5739.024(B). Fifty
percent (50%) of the revenue from the tax imposed by this subsection (b) shall
be deposited to the 268 Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Fund.
(Ord. 89-677. Passed 12-19-89.)
 
197.03  CONSUMER TO PAY TAX; COLLECTION AND REPORTING OF TAX BY VENDOR.
   The tax imposed by Section
197.02 shall be paid by the consumer to the vendor, and each vendor shall
collect from the consumer, as a trustee for the City, the full and exact amount
of the tax payable on each sale, in the manner and at the times provided as
follows:
   (a)    If the price is, at or prior to the sale, paid in currency passed
from hand to hand by the consumer or his agent to the vendor or his agent, the
vendor or his agent shall collect the tax with and at the same time as the
price.
   (b)    If the price is otherwise paid or to be paid, the vendor or his agent
shall, at or prior to the sale, charge the tax imposed by Section
197.02 to the account of the consumer, which amount shall be collected by the
vendor from the consumer in addition to the price. Such sale shall be reported
on and the amount of the tax applicable thereto shall be remitted with the
return for the period in which the sale is made, and the amount of the tax
shall become a legal charge in favor of the vendor and against the consumer.
      (Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
197.04  RECORDS.
   (a)    Each vendor shall keep complete and accurate records of sales,
together with a record of the-tax collected thereon, which shall be the amount
due under this chapter, and shall keep all invoices and other pertinent
documents. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for a period of
four years, unless the Director of Finance, in writing, consents to their
destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer.
 
   (b)    The Director of Finance, or any employee authorized by the Director
of Finance, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and
federal tax returns of any vendor or other person for the purpose of verifying
the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due under this chapter. Every such vendor, supposed vendor, or other person is
hereby directed and required to furnish upon written order by the Director of
Finance, the means, facilities and opportunity for making such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
 
   (c)    The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to order any person
reasonably believed to have knowledge of the facts to appear before him and may
examine such person, under oath, concerning any sale which was or should have
been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such sale, and
for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and
federal tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as
parties or witnesses, whenever he reasonably believes such persons have
knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
(Ord. 86-518. Passed 8-19-86.)
 
197.05  MONTHLY RETURN BY VENDOR; PAYMENTS.
   Each vendor shall, on or before the last day of March, 1990, and on or
before the tenth day of each month thereafter, make and file a return for the
preceding month, on forms prescribed by the Director of Finance, showing the
receipts from sales; the amount of tax due from the vendor to the City for the
period covered by the return; the amount of tax required to be collected by the
vendor from the consumer by application of the rate specified in Section
197.02 and such other information as the Director deems necessary for the
proper administration of this chapter. The Director may extend the time for
making and filing returns and may remit all or any part of amounts or penalties
which may become due under this chapter, and may adopt rules and regulations
relating thereto. Such return shall be filed by mailing the same to the City
Treasurer, together with payment of the amount of tax shown to be due thereon.
(Ord. 90-162. Passed 3-20-90.)
 
197.06  LATE PENALTY.
   If all or any portion of the tax levied by Section
197.02 is not paid by the time required under Section
197.05, there shall be added to the amount of any such unpaid tax a penalty of
ten percent (10%) thereof.
(Ord. 78-299, Passed 8-9-78; Ord. 16-130, Passed 5-24-16.)
 
197.07  SALE OF ENTIRE BUSINESS; SUCCESSOR LIABILITIES.
   If any person liable for the tax levied by Section
197.02 sells his business or stock of merchandise or quits his business, the
tax and penalty imposed by or pursuant to this chapter on sales made prior to
that time shall become due and payable immediately, and such person shall make
a final return within fifteen days after the date of selling or quitting
business. His successor shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase
money to cover the amount of such tax and penalties due and unpaid until the
former owner produces a receipt from the City Treasurer showing that the taxes
and penalties have been paid, or a certificate indicating that no taxes are
due. If the purchaser of the business or stock of goods fails to withhold
purchase money, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes and
penalties accrued and unpaid during the operation of the business by the former
owner.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
197.08  TAX PAID BY CONSUMER.
   No consumer shall fail or refuse to pay the full and exact tax as required
by this chapter, or refuse to comply with any section thereof.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
197.09  VENDOR TO COLLECT TAX; REBATE PROHIBITED.
   No vendor shall fail to collect the full and exact tax as required by this
chapter, or refund, remit or rebate, to a consumer, either directly or
indirectly and, by whatsoever means, any of the tax levied by Section
197.02, or make in any form of advertising, verbal or otherwise, any statements
which might imply that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the
consumer by an adjustment of prices, or selling at a price including the tax,
or rebating the tax in any other manner.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
197.10  FILING REPORTS AND RETURNS.
   No person, including any officer of a corporation or employee of a
corporation having control or supervision of or charged with the responsibility
of filing returns, shall fail to file any return or report required to be filed
by Section
197.05, or file or cause to be filed any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, report or statement or aid or abet another in the filing of any false
or fraudulent return, report or statement.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
197.11 268 HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX FUND.
   Fifty percent (50%) of all funds received from the tax levied in Section
197.02(b) shall be deposited with the City Treasurer upon receipt by the City
and shall be accounted for and known as the 268 Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Fund
and, when appropriated by the City Commission, shall be spent solely to make
contributions to convention and visitors bureaus operating within Clark County,
Ohio.
(Ord. 89-677. Passed 12-19-89.)
 
197.99 PENALTY.
   (a)    Whoever fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to Section
197.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day's continued
violation is a separate offense.
(Ord. 86-518. Passed 8-19-86.)
 
   (b)    Whoever violates Section
197.09 or Section
197.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
 
   (c)    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any section other than
Sections
197.04,
197.09 or
197.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 78-299. Passed 8-9-78.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 199
Motor Vehicle License Tax
 
199.01   Levy.
199.02   Duration.
199.03   Payment.
199.04   Reductions and exemptions.
199.05   Disposition of proceeds.
199.06   Additional levies.
199.07   Duration of additional tax.
199.08   Payment of additional tax.
199.09   Reductions and exemptions for additional tax.
199.10   Disposition of proceeds from additional tax.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to levy - see Ohio R. C. 4504.06, 4504.172
 
199.01  LEVY.
   (a)  There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of
motor vehicles on the public roads or highways for the purpose of paying the
costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this
section; and for planning, constructing, improving, maintaining and repairing
public roads, highways and streets; maintaining and repairing bridges and
viaducts; paying the City's portion of the costs and expenses of cooperating
with the department of highways in the planning, improvement and construction
of state highways; paying the City's portion of the compensation, damages, cost
and expenses of planning, constructing, reconstructing, improving, maintaining
and repairing roads and streets; paying any costs apportioned to the City under
Ohio R. C. 4907.47; paying debt service charges on notes or bonds of the City
issued for such purposes; purchasing, erecting and maintaining street and
traffic signs and markets; purchasing, erecting and maintaining traffic lights
and signals; and to supplement revenue already available for such purposes.
 
   (b)    Such tax shall be at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) permotor
vehicle on each and every motor vehicle the district of registration of which,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.10 is in the City.
 
   (c)  As used in this chapter the term "motor vehicle" means any and all
vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicle in OhioR. C. 4501.01
and 4505.01.
(Ord. 73-39.  Passed 2-27-73.)
199.02  DURATION.
   The tax imposed by Section
199.01 shall apply to and be in effect for the registration year commencing
April 16, 1974, and shall continue in effect and application during each
registration year thereafter.
(Ord. 73-39. Passed 2-27-73. )
 
199.03  PAYMENT.
   The tax imposed by Section
199.01 shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio or
to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for registration of a motor
vehicle is made as provided in Ohio R. C. 4503.10.
(Ord. 73-39. Passed 2-27-73. )
 
199.04  REDUCTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax imposed by Section
199.01 shall be subject to reductions in the manner provided in Section 4503.11
of the Ohio Revised Code and the exemptions provided in Section 4503.16,
4503.17, 4503.171, 4503.173, 4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(Ord. 94-162. Passed 5-3-94. )
 
199.05  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All moneys derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall be used by the
City only for the purposes described in Section
199.01.
(Ord. 73-39. Passed 2-27-73. )
 
199.06  ADDITIONAL LEVIES.
   (a)    There are hereby levied two annual license taxes, pursuant to
Sections 4504.172 and 4504.173 of the Ohio Revised Code and in addition to that
levied in Section
199.01, upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways
for the purpose of paying the cost and expenses of enforcing and administering
the tax provided for in this section; and to supplement revenue already
available to the City under this chapter and Sections 4504.04, 4504.06,
4504.17, or 4504.171 of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (b)    Such additional taxes shall be at the rate of two separate Five
Dollars ($5.00) taxes per motor vehicle on each and every motor vehicle in the
district the registration of which, as defined in Section 4503.10 of the Ohio
Revised Code, is in the City.
 
   (c)    As used in this chapter, the term "motor vehicle" means any and all
vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicle in Section 4501.01 and
4505.01 of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 19-134. Passed 5-21-19.)
 
199.07  DURATION OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
   (a)   The additional Five Dollars ($5.00) tax imposed by Section
199.06, pursuant to Section 4504.172 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall apply to
be in effect for the registration year commencing January 1, 1995, and shall
continue in effect and application during each registration year thereafter.
 
   (b)   The additional Five Dollars ($5.00) tax also imposed by Section
199.06, pursuant to Section 4504.173 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be
effective July 3, 2019, commencing with registration year January 1, 2020, and
shall continue in effect and application during each registration year
thereafter.
(Ord. 94-162. Passed 5-3-94; Ord. 19-134. Passed 5-21-19; Ord. 19-180. Passed
7-2-19.)
 
199.08  PAYMENT OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
   The tax imposed by Section
199.06 shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio or
to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for registration of a motor
vehicle is made as provided in Section 4503.10 of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 94-162. Passed 5-3-94. )
 
199.09  REDUCTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS FOR ADDITIONAL TAX.
   The tax imposed by Section
199.06 shall be subject to reductions in the manner provided in Section 4503.11
of the Ohio Revised Code and the exemptions provided in Sections 4503.16,
4503.17, 4503.171, 4503.14, and 4503.43 of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 94-162. Passed 5-3-94. )
 
199.10  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM ADDITIONAL TAX.
   All monies derived from the tax hereinbefore levied under Section
199.06 shall be used by the City only for the purposes described in Section
199.06.
(Ord. 94-162.  Passed 5-3-94.)
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART THREE - TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE ONE - Administration
Chap.
301.  Definitions.
Chap.
303.  Enforcement, Application and Penalty.
Chap.
305.  Traffic Control.
Chap.
307.  Impounding Vehicles.
 
TITLE THREE - Streets and Traffic Control Devices
Chap.
311.  Street Obstructions and Special Uses.
Chap.
313.  Traffic Control Devices.
 
TITLE FIVE - Vehicles
Chap.
331.  Operation Generally.
Chap.
333.  OVI; Willful Misconduct; Speed.
Chap.
335.  Licensing; Accidents.
Chap.
337.  Safety and Equipment.
Chap.
339.  Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
Chap.
341.  Commercial Drivers.
 
TITLE SEVEN - Parking
Chap.
351.  Parking Generally.
Chap.
353.  Parking Meters.
Chap.
355.  Taxicab Stands.
Chap.
357.  Junk Vehicles.
 
TITLE NINE - Pedestrians, Bicycles and Motorcycles
Chap.
371.  Pedestrians.
Chap.
373.  Bicycles, Motorcycles and Skateboards.
Chap.
375. Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All Purpose Vehicles.
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART THREE - TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE ONE - Administration
Chap.
301.  Definitions.
Chap.
303.  Enforcement, Impounding and Penalty.
Chap.
305.  Traffic Control.
Chap.
307.  Impounding Vehicles.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 301
Definitions
301.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
301.02   Agricultural tractor.
301.03   Alley.
301.031   Beacon; hybrid beacon.
301.04   Bicycle; motorized bicycle; moped; electric bicycle.
301.05   Bus.
301.06   Business district.
301.07   Commercial tractor.
301.08   Controlled-access highway.
301.09   Crosswalk.
301.10   Driver or operator.
301.11   Emergency vehicle.
301.12   Explosives.
301.13   Expressway.
301.14   Flammable liquid.
301.15   Freeway.
301.16   Gross weight.
301.161   Highway traffic signal.
301.17   Intersection.
301.18   Laned street or highway.
301.181   Median.
301.19   Motorcycle.
301.20   Motor vehicle.
301.201   Operate.
301.21   Park or parking.
301.22   Pedestrian.
301.23   Person.
301.24   Pole trailer.
301.25   Police officer.
301.251   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense.
301.26   Private road or driveway.
301.27   Public safety vehicle.
301.28   Railroad.
301.29   Railroad sign or signal.
301.30   Railroad train.
301.31   Residence district.
301.32   Right of way.
301.321   Road service vehicle.
301.33   Roadway.
301.34   Safety zone.
301.35   School bus.
301.36   Semitrailer.
301.361   Shared-use path.
301.37   Sidewalk.
301.38   State route.
301.39   Stop (when required).
301.40   Stopping or standing.
301.41   Stop intersection.
301.42   Street or highway; arterial street.
301.43   Through street or highway.
301.44   Thruway.
301.45   Traffic.
301.46   Traffic control device.
301.47   Traffic control signal.
301.48   Trailer.
301.49   Truck.
301.50   Urban district.
301.51   Vehicle.
301.52   Wheelchair, motorized.
301.53   Waste collection vehicle.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Funeral procession defined - see TRAF.
331.24
Street racing defined - see TRAF.
333.07
Studded tire defined - see TRAF.
339.11
Blind person defined - see TRAF.
371.02
Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all purpose vehicle defined - see TRAF.
375.01
School zones defined - see TRAF.
333.03(b)
 
301.01  MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   The following words and phrases when used in this Traffic Code, except as
otherwise provided, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this chapter.
301.02  AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   "Agricultural tractor" means every self-propelling vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes. 
(ORC 4511.01(J))
301.03  ALLEY.
   "Alley" means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that has been
declared an "alley" by Council. 
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
301.031 BEACON; HYBRID BEACON.
   (a)   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal
sections that operate in a flashing mode. 
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
   (b)   “Hybrid beacon” means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in
a dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed
and, when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control
signal indications. 
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
301.04  BICYCLE; MOTORIZED BICYCLE; MOPED; ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   (a)   "Bicycle" means every device, other than a device that is designed
solely for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human
power upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of
which is more than fourteen inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
   (b)   "Motorized bicycle" or “moped” means any vehicle having either two
tandem wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be
pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than fifty cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater
than twenty miles per hour on a level surface. 
   “Motorized bicycle” or “moped” does not include an electric bicycle.  (ORC
4511.01(H))
   (c)   “Electric bicycle” means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2
electric bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined in this section. 
(ORC 4511.01(RRR))
      (1)   “Class 1 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty miles per
hour.  (ORC 4511.01(SSS))
      (2)   “Class 2 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty
watts that may provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling
and is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty miles per hour.  (ORC 4511.01(TTT))
      (3)   “Class 3 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty-eight miles per
hour.  (ORC 4511.01(UUU))
301.05  BUS.
   "Bus" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, and every motor
vehicle, automobile for hire or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor
vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation. 
(ORC 4511.01(L))
301.06  BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   "Business district" means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections where fifty
percent or more of the frontage between such successive intersections is
occupied by buildings in use for business, or where fifty percent or more of
the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use
for business, and the character of such territory is indicated by official
traffic control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
301.07  COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   "Commercial tractor" means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of such other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both. 
(ORC 4511.01(I))
301.08  CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   "Controlled-access highway" means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such street or highway.  (ORC 4511.01(CC))
301.09  CROSSWALK.
   "Crosswalk" means:
   (a)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, there shall not be a
crosswalk where authorized signs have been placed indicating no crossing. 
      (ORC 4511.01(LL))
301.10  DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   "Driver" or "operator" means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
301.11  EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   "Emergency vehicle" means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations when identified as such as
required by law, the Ohio Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer. 
(ORC 4511.01(D))
301.12  EXPLOSIVES.
   "Explosives" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are
capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb.
   Manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosives when the individual
units contain explosives in such limited quantities, of such nature or in such
packing, that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous or a destructive
explosion of such units, to the injury of life, limb or property by fire, by
friction, by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator, such as fixed
ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches. 
(ORC 4511.01(T))
301.13  EXPRESSWAY.
   "Expressway" means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of fifty percent of all crossroads
separated in grade. 
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
301.14  FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   "Flammable liquid" means any liquid that has a flash point of seventy
degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed
cup test device. 
(ORC 4511.01(U))
301.15  FREEWAY.
   "Freeway" means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with all
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
301.16  GROSS WEIGHT.
   "Gross weight" means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon. 
(ORC 4511.01(V))
301.161 HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.  (ORC 4511.01
(QQQ))
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
301.162 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   “Highway traffic signal”means a power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action.  “Highway
traffic signal” does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated
pavement markers, warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.  (ORC 4511.01
(MMM))
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
301.17  INTERSECTION.
   "Intersection" means:
   (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any
other angle might come into conflict.  The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
   (b)   If a highway includes two roadways that are thirty feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection.  If both intersecting highways
include two roadways thirty feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
   (c)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in subsection (b)
of this section:
      (1)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on
the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
      (2)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
      (3)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from
the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far
side of the crosswalk.  (ORC 4511.01(KK))
301.18  LANED STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   "Laned street or highway" means a street or highway the roadway of which is
divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.  (ORC
4511.01(GG))
301.181 MEDIAN.
   “Median” means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. 
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.  (ORC
4511.01(NNN))
301.19  MOTORCYCLE.
   "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as "motor-driven cycle," "motor scooter," “autocycle,” “cab-
enclosed motorcycle” or "motorcycle" without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.  (ORC 4511.01(C))  “Autocycle” and “cab-enclosed motorcycle” are
defined in 335.09(b) and (c) of the Springfield Codified Ordinance.
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
301.20  MOTOR VEHICLE.
   "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power, except motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers,
traction engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in
construction work and not designed for or employed in general highway
transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging
machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less.  (ORC
4511.01(B))
301.201 OPERATE.
   “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.  (ORC 4511.01
(HHH))
301.21  PARK OR PARKING.
   "Park or parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
301.22  PEDESTRIAN.
   "Pedestrian" means any natural person afoot.  (ORC 4511.01(X))
301.23  PERSON.
   "Person" means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.  (ORC 4511.01(W))
301.24  POLE TRAILER.
   "Pole trailer" means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connection.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
301.25  POLICE OFFICER.
   "Police officer" means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.   
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
301.251 PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.522, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771,
4511.78 or 4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of division (A)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4511.17, divisions (A) to
(D) of Ohio R.C. 4511.51, or division (A) of Ohio R.C. 4511.74;
   (c)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (d)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.214.
   (e)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to
any section or provision set forth or described in subsection (a) to (d) of
this section.
      (ORC 4511.01(III))
301.26  PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   (a)   "Private road or driveway" means every way or place in private
ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.  (ORC 4511.01(DD))
   (b)   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or
road, including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is private owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. “Private road open to public travel”
includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within a private gated
property where access is restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving
aisle within a parking area, or a private grade crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))
301.27  PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   "Public safety vehicle" means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipal corporation, township or county and private ambulances and transport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or the
Municipality;
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service.  The Ohio Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described in this subsection (c);
   (d)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer fire fighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill or
injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be considered
a public safety vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital. 
      (ORC 4511.01(E))
   (e)   Vehicles used by the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Enforcement Unit
for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as
specified in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
301.28  RAILROAD.
   "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right of way. 
(ORC 4511.01(P))
301.29  RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   "Railroad sign or signal" means any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
301.30  RAILROAD TRAIN.
   "Railroad train" means a steam engine, or an electric or other motor, with
or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad. 
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
301.31  RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   "Residence district" means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
301.32  RIGHT OF WAY.
   "Right of way" means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it or the individual is moving in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its or the individual’s path;
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes.  When used in this context, right of way includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the State or local authority.  (ORC 4511.01(UU))
301.321 ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.  (ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
301.33  ROADWAY.
   "Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.  If a street
or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" means any
such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively. 
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
301.34  SAFETY ZONE.
   "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times.    (ORC 4511.01(MM))
301.35  SCHOOL BUS.
   "School bus" means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
that is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of
learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided "school bus" does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of the Municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediately
contiguous to the Municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the
Public Utilities Commission unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and "school bus" does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than fifteen children in the van or bus at any time.  "Child
day-care center" and "type A family day-care home" have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 5104.01. 
(ORC 4511.01(F), (FFF))
301.36  SEMITRAILER.
   "Semitrailer" means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.  (ORC 4511.01(N))
301.361 SHARED-USE PATH.
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separate from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment.  A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.  A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has
historically been reserved for nonmotorized use. 
(ORC 4511.01(PPP))
301.37  SIDEWALK.
   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.  (ORC 4511.01(FF))
301.38  STATE ROUTE.
   "State route" means every highway that is designated with an official State
route number and so marked.  (ORC 4511.01(JJ))
301.39  STOP (WHEN REQUIRED).
   "Stop" when required means a complete cessation of movement.
301.40  STOPPING OR STANDING.
   (a)   "Stop or stopping" when prohibited means any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
   (b)   "Stand or standing" means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise then temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
301.41  STOP INTERSECTION.
   "Stop intersection" means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected. 
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
301.42  STREET OR HIGHWAY; ARTERIAL STREET.
   (a)   "Street" or "highway" are synonymous and mean the entire width between
the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare
for purposes of vehicular travel.  (ORC 4511.01(BB))
   (b)   "Arterial street"  means any United States or State numbered route,
controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.  (ORC 4511.01(CCC))
301.43  THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   "Through street or highway" means every street or highway as provided in
Section
313.02.  (ORC 4511.01(HH))
301.44  THRUWAY.
   "Thruway" means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
301.45  TRAFFIC.
   "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel any
street or highway or private road open to public travel.  (ORC 4511.01(TT))
301.46  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   “Traffic control device” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to
a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
301.47  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   "Traffic control signal" means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
301.48  TRAILER.
   "Trailer" means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any such vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five
miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat
between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn
or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a
speed of more than twenty-five miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
301.49  TRUCK.
   "Truck" means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.  (ORC 4511.01(K))
301.50  URBAN DISTRICT.
   "Urban district" means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for distance of a
quarter of a mile or more, and the character of such territory is indicated by
official traffic control devices.  (ORC 4511.01(PP))
301.51  VEHICLE.
   "Vehicle" means every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a street or highway, except that “vehicle” does not include any
motorized wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, or any
device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power. 
(ORC 4511.01(A))
301.52  WHEELCHAIR, MOTORIZED.
   "Motorized wheelchair" means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a handicapped person and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
301.53  WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.
   “Waste collection vehicle” means a vehicle used in the collection of
garbage, refuse, trash or recyclable materials. 
(ORC 4511.01(RRR))
CHAPTER 303
Enforcement, Impounding and Penalty
 
303.01   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
303.02   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guard.
303.03   Officer may remove ignition key.
303.04   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
303.041   Emergency, public safety and coroner’s vehicles exempt.
303.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
303.06   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
303.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
303.08   Providing false information to police officer.
303.09   Civil penalties for automated traffic control photographic system.
303.99   General Traffic Code penalties.
303.991   Committing an offense while distracted penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Disposition of unclaimed vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.62 et seq.
Citations for minor misdemeanors - see Ohio R.C. 2935.26 et seq.
Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations - see Ohio R.C. 4507.16, 4507.34
State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4507.40
Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law - see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
331.20,
333.06
 
303.01  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate 
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  Refer to Ohio R.C. 2921.331 for filing charges under
subsection (b) hereof since the jury or judge as trier of fact may determine
the violation to be a felony.)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply with an
order or signal of a police officer.  A violation of subsection (a) is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Except as hereinafter provided, a violation
of subsection (b) is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A violation of
subsection (b) is a felony if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds any one
of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
      (1)   In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately
after the commission of a felony;
      (2)   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a proximate
cause of serious physical harm to persons or property;
      (3)   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
subsection (a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of subsection (b) of
this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5).  If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in division (A)(1) of that section.  The court may grant limited
driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of this section as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4510.021.  No judge shall
suspend the first three years of suspension under a class two suspension of an
offender’s license, permit or privilege required by this division on any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection.
(ORC 2921.331)
303.02  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARD.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code.  Firemen, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.  The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by
gesture or visible signal or by any combination thereof.  No person shall fail
to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or fireman
issued pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
303.03  OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.  The officer removing such key shall place
notification upon the vehicle detailing his name and badge number, the place
where such key may be reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming such key.  The
key shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of
proof of ownership. 
(ORC 4549.05)
303.04  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code do not apply to persons, teams,
motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the
surface of a highway within an area designated by traffic control devices, but
apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law, and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Sections
331.01 to
331.04,
331.06 to
331.08,
331.31,
333.04,
337.01 and Ohio R.C. 4511.66 and 5577.01 to 5577.09.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of as highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Sections
331.01 to
331.04,
331.06 to
331.08,
331.31,
333.04,
337.01 or Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or 5577.01 to 5577.09.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to
5577.09.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.  (ORC
4511.04)
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
303.041 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER’S VEHICLES EXEMPT.
   (a)   Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202,
4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36,
4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431,
4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,
4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69 and all sections of this
Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to
the sections listed above, do not apply to the driver of an emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is
responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and displaying at least one
flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and if the
driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or
bell.  This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.  (ORC 4511.041)
   (b)   Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and 4511.66, and
all sections of this Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are
substantially equivalent to the sections listed above, do not apply to a
coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171.  This section does not relieve a coroner,
deputy coroner, or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.  (ORC 4511.042)
303.05  APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway shall be
subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of such sections which by their nature are
inapplicable.  (ORC 4511.05)
303.06  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except:  in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right of way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.051)
303.07  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
Municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
303.08  PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION TO POLICE OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, social security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
303.09  CIVIL PENALITIES FOR AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CONTROL PHOTOGRAPHIC SYSTEM.
     (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this traffic code, there is
hereby adopted a civil enforcement system for red light camera system
violations as outlined in this section.  The automated traffic control
photographic system (ATCPS) imposes monetary liability on the owner of a
vehicle, for failure of an operator thereof to comply with traffic control
indications in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The Police Division shall be responsible for administering the
ATCPS.  Specifically, that division shall be authorized to install and operate
an automated traffic control signal photographic system within the City.
      (3)   This section applies whenever traffic is controlled by traffic
control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows,
successively one at a time or in combination.  Only the colors green, red and
yellow (amber) shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals,  and said
lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles  as follows:
         A.   “Green indication” means the same as defined in Section
313.03(a).
         B.   “Steady yellow indication” means the same as defined in Section
313.03(b).
         C.   “Steady red indication” means the same as defined in Section
313.03(c).
      (4)   Intersections in which an ATCPS is installed shall have visible
postings upon approach of the intersection indicating that the intersection is
equipped with an automated traffic control signal monitoring system.
      (5)   The Police Division shall administer the ATCPS program and shall
maintain a list of system locations within the city limits where traffic-
control photographic systems are installed.
      (6)   Whenever a Springfield Police Officer witnesses a violation of
Section
313.03(c) or Ohio Revised Code Section 4511.13, and has issued a citation
pursuant to those sections, this Ordinance does not apply.  However, the
recorded image may be used as evidence for a violation of Section
313.03(c) or Ohio Revised Code Section 4511.13.  Any citation for a violation
of Section
313.03(c) or Ohio Revised Code Section 4511.13 issued personally by an officer
of the City of Springfield Police Division at an ATCPS location shall not be
issued in the manner described under this section.  The citation shall be
treated in the same manner as prescribed by applicable Traffic or other Rules.
      (7)   This section shall not apply to violations involving vehicle or
pedestrian collisions.
   (b)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Owner” means the registered owner of a motor vehicle as identified
by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles for the state registered or a lessee of a motor
vehicle under a lease of 6 months or more.
      (2)   “Recorded Images” means images recorded by an automated traffic
control signal photographic system on any of the following:
         A.   Two or more photographs; or
         B.   Two or more microphotographs; or
         C.   Two or more electronic images; or
         D.   Two or more Digital images; or
         E.   Videotape; or
         F.   Any other medium; and
         G.   Showing the front or rear of a motor vehicle and on at least one
image or portion of tape, clearly identifying the license plate number of the
motor vehicle.
      (3)   “Automated Traffic Control Signal Photographic System” means a
device with one or more motor vehicle sensors, installed to work in conjunction
with a traffic control signal, to produce recorded images of motor vehicles
entering an intersection against a red signal indication.
      (4)   “In Operation” means operating in good working condition.
      (5)   “Hearing Officer” means an independent third party, not employed by
the City of Springfield.
      (6)   “System Location” is the approach to an intersection toward which a
photographic, microphotographic, electronic image, digital image, videotape, or
any other medium is directed and is in operation.  It is the location where the
automated traffic control photographic system is installed to monitor offenses
under this section.
      (7)   “Responsible Party” is the person who was operating the vehicle at
the time of the violation or the person who had care, custody, and control of
the vehicle at the time of the violation.
   (c)   Violation.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a
system location when the traffic controls signal for that vehicle’s direction
of travel is emitting a steady red light.  The owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for a violation under this section, except when the owner can
provide evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody, and control of
another person at the time of the violation, as described in subsection (c)(2).
      (2)   The owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation
if, within fifteen (15) calendar days after notification of the liability, the
owner furnishes the Police Division with:
         A.   The name and address of the person who leased, rented, or
otherwise had the care, custody, and control of the vehicle at the time of the
violation; or
         B.   An affidavit by the owner stating that at the time of the
violation, the vehicle or the license plates of the vehicle involved were
stolen or were in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have
the owner’s permission to use the vehicle.  In order to demonstrate that the
vehicle or the license plates were stolen before the violation occurred and
were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the
violation, the owner must submit proof that a police report about the stolen
motor vehicle or license plates was filed prior to the violation or within 48
hours after the violation occurred.
      (3)   A certified copy of the notice of liability alleging the violation
of this Section occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a duly authorized Police
Officer of the City of Springfield, with the recorded images produced by an
automated traffic control signal photographic system shall be prima facie
evidence of the facts contained therein and shall be admissible in a proceeding
alleging a violation under this section.
      (4)   If the vehicle involved in the violation is a commercial vehicle
and the notice of liability is issued to a corporate entity, the corporate
entity must provide to the Police Division an affidavit, sworn to or affirmed
by the statutory agent of the corporate entity, that:
         A.   States that the person/entity named in the notice of liability
was not in operation of the vehicle at the time of the violation; and
         B.   Provides the name, address, and driver’s license identification
number of the person who was in operation of the vehicle at the time of the
violation.
   (d)   Notice of Liability.
      (1)   The notice of liability shall be processed by the City or its
designee, and shall be served by ordinary mail to the owner’s address as given
on the motor vehicle registration from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the
state registered.  The notice of liability shall include:
         A.   The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle;
         B.   The license plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
         C.   The violation charged;
         D.   The location of the intersection;
         E.   The date and time of the violation;
         F.   A copy of the recorded images(s);
         G.   The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the
civil penalty should be paid and where the payment should be made;
         H.   A signed statement by a Springfield Police Officer that based on
inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being operated in
violation of subsection (c)(1) of this section, and a statement that the
recorded images are prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (c)(1) of
this section;
         I.   Information advising the person alleged to be liable of the
options as provided in subsection (e)(1) of this section;
         J.   The time, place, and manner in which an administrative appeal can
be initiated and a warning that failure to exercise the options provided under
subsection (e)(1) of this section in a timely manner is an admission of
liability.
      (2)   The City of Springfield or its designee may mail, by ordinary mail,
a warning notice in lieu of notice of liability under this section.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (e)(3)B., a notice of liability
issued under this section shall be mailed no later than fifteen (15) calendar
days after the alleged violation.
      (4)   Except as provided under subsections (e)(3)A. of this section, the
Police Division or its designee may not mail a notice of liability to a person
who is not the owner of the vehicle.
   (e)   Administrative Appeal.
      (1)   An owner or responsible party who receives a “notice of liability”,
under this section may do one of the following:
         A.   Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with instructions on the
notice of liability; or
         B.   Within fifteen (15) calendar days provide the Police Division or
its designee information as to the driver of the vehicle, at the time of the
violation; or
         C.   Contest the notice of liability by filing a written request for
review of the notice of liability with payment in the amount equal to the
amount of the civil penalty to the Police Division or its designee.  An
individual desiring a hearing must post payment equal to the amount of the
civil penalty before an appeal hearing will be scheduled.  A written notice of
request for review must be filed within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the
notification of liability.  The failure to give notice of request for review
within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
notice of liability.  A Hearing Officer shall hear reviews.  A hearing shall be
held within ten (10) business days of the receipt of the request for review;
this time may be extended upon a written request for additional time.
            1.   The Hearing Officer shall determine whether a preponderance of
evidence establishes that a violation of this section occurred and the person
requesting the review is liable.  A certified copy of the notice of liability
alleging the violation of this Section occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a duly
authorized Police Officer of the City of Springfield, with the recorded images
produced by a traffic control photographic system shall be prima facie evidence
of the facts contained therein and shall be admissible in a proceeding alleging
a violation under this section.  Adjudication of liability shall be based on a
preponderance of the evidence.
            2.   If the Hearing Officer finds sufficient evidence of a
violation, but the owner or the responsible party is not liable, the Hearing
Officer shall, in writing, issue a decision finding the individual not liable
and submit it to the Police Division or its designee.
      (2)   If the owner or responsible party chooses to contest the notice of
liability, the Hearing Officer may consider any of the following as an
affirmative defense of a violation:
         A.   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in
order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle in accordance with Ohio
Revised Code Section 4511.45, or to a funeral procession in accordance with
Section
331.24.
         B.   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor
vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the
control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation.  In order to
demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen
before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
police report about the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
prior to the violation or within 48 hours after the violation occurred.
         C.   That this section is unenforceable because at the time and place
of the alleged violation, the traffic control signal was not operating properly
or the traffic control signal monitoring system was not in proper position and
the recorded image is not legible enough to determine the information needed.
         D.   Evidence, other than that adduced pursuant to subsection (e)(2)B.
of this section, that the owner or person named in the notice of liability was
not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation.  To satisfy the
evidentiary burden under this subsection, the owner or person named in the
notice of liability shall provide to the Hearing Office evidence showing the
identity of the person who was operating the vehicle at the time of the
violation, including, at a minimum, the operator’s name and current address,
and any other evidence that the Hearing Officer deems pertinent.
      (3)   If the Hearing Officer finds that the person or entity named in the
notice of liability was not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation
or receives evidence under subsection (e)(2)D. identifying the person driving
the vehicle at the time of the violation, the Hearing Officer shall provide to
the Police Division or its designee within five (5) calendar days, a copy of
any evidence substantiating who was operating the vehicle at the time of the
violation.
         A.   Upon the receipt of evidence of the responsible party pursuant to
this subsection or pursuant to subsection (c)(2)A., the Police Division or its
designee may issue a notice of liability, with the name and address of the
responsible party and the information required by subsection (d)(1)B., C., D.,
E., F., G., H., I., and J. of this section, to the person that the evidence
indicates was operating the vehicle at the time of the violation.
         B.   A notice of liability issued under this subsection (e)(3) shall
be sent by ordinary mail no later than five (5) business days after receipt of
the evidence from the Hearing Officer or the owner.
   (f)   Civil Penalties.
      (1)   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a
police officer at the time of the violation, the owner or responsible party for
the motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if the motor vehicle is
recorded by an automated traffic control photographic system while being
operated in violation of this section.
      (2)   The civil penalty under this section shall be $100.00.  Persons who
choose to pay the civil penalty without appearing before a Hearing Officer may
do so in the manner indicated on the notice of liability.  Persons who fail to
pay the civil penalty within fifteen (15) calendar days after receiving a
“notice of liability” shall be liable for an additional penalty in the amount
of $30.00. 
      (3)   A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section
is not a moving violation for the purpose of assessing points under Ohio
Revised Code Section 4507.021(16) for minor misdemeanor moving traffic offenses
and shall not be recorded on the driving record of the owner or operator of the
vehicle and shall not be reported to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (g)   Collection of Civil Penalty.  If the civil penalty is not paid, the
civil penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall be
collectible, together with any interest and penalties thereon, by civil suit. 
(Ord. 05-41.  Passed 2-15-05.)
303.99  GENERAL TRAFFIC CODE PENALTIES.
   (a)   General Misdemeanor Classifications.  Whoever violates any provision
of this Traffic Code for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (b)   Penalties.  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
this Traffic Code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both,
which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as provided in
this section.
 
Classification of    MisdemeanorMaximum Term    Maximum
                                  of Imprisonment   Fine 
First degree                      180 days            $1,000.00
Second degree                     90 days         750.00
Third degree                      60 days         500.00
Fourth degree                     30 days         250.00
Minor                             No imprisonment 150.00
(ORC 2929.24; 2929.28)
303.991  COMMITTING AN OFFENSE WHILE DISTRACTED PENALTY.
   (a)   As used in this section and each section of the Traffic Code where
specified, all of the following apply:
      (1)   "Distracted" means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
         A.   Using a handheld electronic wireless communications device, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.204 except when utilizing any of the following:
            1.   The device's speakerphone function;
            2.   A wireless technology standard for exchanging data over short
distances;
            3.   A "voice-operated or hands-free" device that allows the person
to use the electronic wireless communications device without the use of either
hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function;
            4.   Any device that is physically or electronically integrated
into the motor vehicle.
         B.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the operation
of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair, the
ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
      (2)   "Distracted" does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time.  A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of Section
 331.43.
      (3)   "Distracted" does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
         As used in subsection (a)(3) of this section:
         A.   "Utility" means an entity specified in division (A), (C), (D),
(E) or (G) of Ohio R.C. 4905.03.
         B.   "Utility service vehicle" means a vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
   (b)   If an offender violates any section of this Traffic Code which
provides for an enhanced penalty for an offense committed while distracted and
the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) as follows:
      (1)   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer issues an
offender a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of any section of the
Traffic Code that indicates that the offender was distracted while committing
the violation and that the distracting activity was a contributing factor to
the commission of the violation, the offender may enter a written plea of
guilty and waive the offender's right to contest the ticket, citation or
summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total amount of the fine
established for the violation and pays the additional fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
            In lieu of payment of the additional fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00), the offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety
course, the duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.  If the offender attends and successfully completes
the course, the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender
successfully completed the course.  The offender shall be required to pay the
total amount of the fine established for the violation, but shall not be
required to pay the additional fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), so long
as the offender submits to the court both the offender's payment in full and
such written evidence.
      (2)   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket, citation
or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is convicted of the
violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, may
impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may impose the additional
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty for the
violation and an additional fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), the court shall inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the
additional fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the offender
instead may elect to attend the distracted driving safety course described in
subsection (b)(1) of this section.  If the offender elects the course option
and attends and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued
written evidence that the offender successfully completed the course.  The
offender shall be required to pay the total amount of the fine established for
the violation, but shall not be required to pay the additional fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00), so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender's payment and such written evidence.
         (ORC 4511.991)
 
 
CHAPTER 305
Traffic Control
 
305.01   Power to place traffic control devices; considerations.
305.02   Temporary regulations.
305.03   Conformity with State Manual.
305.04   Powers of City Manager.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional history for similar State law
Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway -
see Ohio R.C. 4511.011
Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11(D)
Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices - see Ohio  R.C. 4511.10,
4511.11
Alteration of prima-facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22(A),
4511.23
Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings - see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs - see Ohio
R.C. 4511.65; TRAF.
313.02
Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
301.46
 
305.01  POWER TO PLACE TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; CONSIDERATIONS.
   The City Manager, is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic control
devices upon any street or highway under his jurisdiction as are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic, and such other traffic control devices as he shall deem necessary for
the proper  control of traffic.  The City Manager shall determine the location,
timing and coordination of such traffic control devices upon the basis of an
applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall consider the
following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage.
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions.
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures.
   (d)   The recommendations of the Police and Fire Chiefs.
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety.
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly.
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
      (Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
305.02  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager, is hereby empowered to make effective the provisions of
this Traffic Code, and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
305.03  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
 
305.04  POWERS OF CITY MANAGER.
   (a)   The City Manager, is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right of way as may be required
before entering the same; or in residence districts designate certain streets
or highways or portions thereof not to be through streets or highways despite
the erection of stop signs or other official traffic control devices at
intersecting streets.
      (2)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection.
      (3)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right of way as required.
      (4)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all
vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction.
      (5)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center line of the roadway.
      (6)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane
or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction.
      (7)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and
passing other traffic or driving to the left of center or center line of the
roadway would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the
street to indicate the beginning and end of such zones.  Such zones may be
marked by an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the
normal center line or offset marked lane line.
      (8)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections.
      (9)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location
to regulate traffic.
      (10)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play
streets.
      (11)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is
in the process of construction, reconstruction or repair.
      (12)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab
stands.
      (13)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones.
      (14)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs
thereat.
      (15)   Erect "No U Turn" signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
      (16)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of
vehicles on streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly
indicating the prohibitions, restrictions or limitations.
      (17)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either
be parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
      (18)   Designate truck routes and streets or parts thereof where either a
weight limit restriction or truck exclusion has been imposed by rule or
regulation provided such is not in conflict with any legislation.
      (19)   Erect signs to prohibit a right turn against a steady red signal
at any intersection.
      (20)   Determine the location and limiting hours of double parking for
loading and unloading.  (Ord. 91-90.  Passed 3-12-91.)
      (21)   Upon application of a mobility-impaired person, issue a
residential reserved parking space designation, which shall remain in effect
for one calendar year, and determine the location of residential reserved
parking spaces for persons who are mobility impaired and have no adequate
available off-street parking and regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing
and parking of vehicles other than that for which the parking space is
established by erecting signs plainly indicating the prohibitions,
restrictions, or limitations.  The City Manager shall collect fees from each
such mobility-impaired person as follows:
 
 
Application fee       $25.00
Sign installation fee 100.00
Annual renewal fee    25.00
         (Ord. 05-233.  Passed 9-6-05.)
 
   (b)   All actions of the City Manager in exercising the powers enumerated
above may be revoked by motion by the City Commission of the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (c)   No provision of this section shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulation are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
 
   (d)   The powers of the City Manager shall not be limited by the specific
enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.  The City Manager shall keep
a record of all his rules, regulations and proceedings in connection with this
chapter.  Violation of such rules and regulations shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in Section
303.99 of the Traffic Code.
CHAPTER 307
Impounding Vehicles
 
307.01   Establishment and location of vehicle pounds.
307.02   Impounding vehicles parked unlawfully.
307.03   Notifying owner; payment of fees; release of vehicle.
307.04   Protests against payment; release of vehicles; charge against owner.
307.05   Record kept by police; disposition of fees.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Sale of unclaimed vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.62 et seq.
Impounding parked vehicles creating an obstruction - see TRAF.
351.01
 
307.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND LOCATION OF VEHICLE POUNDS.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to create vehicle pounds to which
vehicles may be removed by police officers or other authorized personnel. Such
pounds shall be located at such places as may be directed by the City Manager
and may be located at private or commercial parking garages with the facilities
for receiving, safeguarding and discharging vehicles.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
307.02  IMPOUNDING VEHICLES PARKED UNLAWFULLY.
   Whenever any vehicle, except a bicycle, shall be found in a space where
parking is not permitted, or parked in violation of the provisions of this
Traffic Code, any member of the Police Division may provide for the removal or
conveyance of such vehicle by means of towing or otherwise, to a vehicle pound.
(Ord. 91-259.  Passed 6-18-91.)
307.03  NOTIFYING OWNER; PAYMENT OF FEES; RELEASE OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be the duty of the police officer impounding or causing to be
impounded any vehicle, to inform the owner or any person claiming an impounded
vehicle, of the nature and circumstances of the violation for which such
vehicle has been impounded.  If such owner or other person shall furnish
evidence of his identity and ownership, together with a receipt from the Clerk
of the Municipal Court or from a member of the Police Division, showing the
payment of all fees for the violation of the provisions of this Code, as well
as the costs of impounding such vehicle, the impounded vehicle shall be
surrendered to him by the police officer or person in charge thereof, who shall
take a receipt for the impounded vehicle.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
307.04  PROTESTS AGAINST PAYMENT; RELEASE OF VEHICLES; CHARGE AGAINST OWNER.
   In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage
fee, the police officer or person in charge of such impounded vehicle shall
surrender the impounded vehicle to the claimant, upon satisfatory evidence of
the identity and ownership of the person claiming such impounded vehicle, and
upon the furnishing of a bond, in an amount as set by rule of the Municipal
Court, by the owner or driver of such vehicle to the Clerk of the Municipal
Court or his deputy, conditioned that such owner or driver will appear before
the Municipal Court to answer to the violation for which such vehicle has been
impounded and it shall thereupon be the duty of the police officer having
knowledge of the fact forthwith to institute the proper proceedings in the
Municipal Court, charge the owner or the driver of such vehicle with the
violation of the ordinance or section of the Codified Ordinances for which the
vehicle was impounded.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
307.05  RECORD KEPT BY POLICE; DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Division to keep a record of the names of
all owners of impounded vehicles, the number of their license tags, and the
nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each
case.  It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Municipal Court to account for
all fees collected under this chapter and pass the same on to the City
Treasurer.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
TITLE THREE - Streets and Traffic Control Devices
Chap.
311.  Street Obstructions and Special Uses.
Chap.
313.  Traffic Control Devices.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 311
Street Obstructions and Special Uses
 
311.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
311.02   Parades and assemblages.
311.03   Toy vehicles on streets.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional history for similar State law
Power to regulate processions or assemblages - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07(C)
Dropping, sifting and leaking loads - see TRAF.
339.08
 
311.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a street,
highway or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such
street, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (b)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
street any noxious, destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove
the same.
   (c)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
street from such vehicle.
   (d)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a street without
proper authority.
   (e)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or vehicle,
shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road, street or
alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage
or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such highway,
except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority
for the repair or construction thereof. 
   (f)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4511.74)
311.02  PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (a)   No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or
participate in any parade, assemblage or procession other than a funeral
procession upon any street or highway, or block off any street or highway area,
without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager.
   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.  Applications shall be
filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade,
procession or assemblage.
   The permit may be refused or cancelled if:
      (1)   The time, place, size or conduct of the parade including the
assembly areas and route of march would unreasonably interfere with the public
convenience and safe use of the streets and highways.
      (2)   The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and
areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the
Municipality.
      (3)   The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably
interfere with the movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment or
ambulance service to other areas of the Municipality.
      (4)   The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for
which a permit has been issued.
      (5)   The information contained in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail.
      (6)   An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper
conduct of the parade.
   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe reasonable
conditions, including the hours, the place of assembly and of dispersal, the
route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions thereof which
may be used or occupied.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
311.03  TOY VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   (a)   No person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any sled, toy
vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play
streets.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
CHAPTER 313
Traffic Control Devices
 
313.01   Obedience to traffic control devices.
313.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs.
313.03   Traffic signal indications.
313.04   Lane-use control signal indications.
313.05   Special pedestrian control signals.
313.06   Flashing traffic signals. (Repealed)
313.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
313.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices.
313.09   Driver's duties upon approaching ambiguous or non-working traffic
signal.
313.10   Unlawful purchase, possession or sale.
313.11   Portable signal preemption devices prohibited.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Designation of through streets or stop intersections - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
(F), 4511.65
Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11(D)
Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.10,
4511.11
Traffic control devices defined - TRAF.
301.46
 
313.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of
any traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. 
   No provisions of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.  Whenever a particular section of
this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.12)
313.02  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All State routes are hereby designated as through streets or highways,
provided that stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals shall be
erected at all intersections with such through streets or highways, except as
otherwise provided in this section.  Where two or more State routes that are
through streets or highways intersect and no traffic control signal is in
operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances
thereto by the Ohio Department of Transportation, except as otherwise provided
in this section.
   Whenever the Ohio Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations.  When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his jurisdiction.  Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this paragraph, he shall give notice, in writing, of
that proposed action to the Municipality at least thirty days before installing
or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways or portions thereof, are hereby designated
through streets or highways, if they are within the Municipality, if they have
a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of such street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have "stop" or "yield" signs or traffic
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways.  For purposes of this section, the limits of such street or highway
or portion thereof, shall be a municipal corporation line, the physical
terminus of the street or highway or any point on such street or highway at
which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or
yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided that in residence
districts the Municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway,
or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected
residence district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. 
Where two or more streets or highways designated under this subsection (b)
intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield
signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Ohio Department
of Transportation or by Council or the authorized local authority, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   Stop signs need not be erected at intersections so constructed as to
permit traffic to safely enter a through street or highway without coming to a
stop.  Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the
operator of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to or merge with all traffic
proceeding on the through street or highway.
   (d)   Council or the authorized local authority may designate additional
through streets or highways and shall erect stop signs, yield signs or traffic
control signals at all streets and highways intersecting such through streets
or highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield intersection
and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to such intersection.  (ORC
4511.65)
313.03  TRAFFIC SIGNAL INDICATIONS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles, and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady Green Signal Indication:
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication is
permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left, or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device.  Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time.  Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk.
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in Section
313.05, pedestrians facing a circular green signal indication are permitted to
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. 
The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the
intersection or so close as to create an immediate hazard at the time  that the
green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.  The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated.  The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Section
313.05 or other traffic control device, shall not start to cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady Red Signal Indication:
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, before then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3)
of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street.  The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street.  The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow, and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Section
313.05 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a steady circular
red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on State highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing Green Signal Indication.  A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication:
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices.  Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time.  Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk.  Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that
the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing Red Signal Indication:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.  The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk.  Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that
the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. 
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   General Application: In the event an official traffic-control signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions
of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by
their nature can have no application.  Any stop required shall be made at a
sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in
the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   Exception.  This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. 
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by Ohio R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62.  (ORC 4511.13)
      (Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
313.04  LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL INDICATIONS.
   (a)   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
      (1)   A steady downward green arrow: A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
      (2)   A steady yellow “X”: A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane
over which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is
being made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
      (3)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
      (4)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
      (5)   A steady red “X”: A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
         (ORC 4511.131)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
313.05  SPECIAL PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (a)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
“walk” or “don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, such signals shall indicate the following instructions:
      (1)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles.  The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
      (2)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
      (3)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian
shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
      (4)   Nothing int his section shall be construed to invalidate the
continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those
signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
      (5)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and
shall not be used.  (ORC 4511.14)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
313.06  FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (Former Ohio R.C. 4511.15 from which Section
313.06 was derived was repealed by House Bill 349, effective April 20, 2012.)
313.07  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be,
is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from view
or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit upon any street any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.  This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
   Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public nuisance,
and the Police Chief is authorized to remove it or cause it to be removed. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.16)
313.08  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.  If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony
and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
         (ORC 4511.17)
313.09  DRIVER'S DUTIES UPON APPROACHING AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC
SIGNAL.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right of way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right of way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways.
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.132)
313.10  UNLAWFUL PURCHASE, POSSESSION OR SALE.
   (a)   As used in this section, "traffic control device" means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the State or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a State or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to State or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the State
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use;
      (5)   The traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02 or a
municipal ordinance relating to theft, or for receiving stolen property in
violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51 or a municipal ordinance relating to receiving
stolen property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 4511.18)
313.11  PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic control signal.
   (b)   Subsection (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons and subsection (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any
of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.71(A)(11), (12), (14)
or (19);
      (2)   A State highway patrol trooper;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (3) or (4).
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “portable signal preemption device” means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
TITLE FIVE - Vehicles
Chap.
331.  Operation Generally.
Chap.
333.  OVI; Willful Misconduct; Speed.
Chap.
335.  Licensing; Accidents.
Chap.
337.  Safety and Equipment.
Chap.
339.  Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
Chap.
341.  Commercial Drivers.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 331
Operation Generally
 
331.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
331.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
331.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver's duties.
331.04   Overtaking and passing upon right.
331.05   Overtaking, passing to left of center.
331.06   Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway.
331.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
331.08   Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
331.09   Following too closely.
331.10   Turning at intersections.
331.11   Turning into private driveway, alley or building.
331.12   "U" turns restricted.
331.13   Starting and backing vehicles.
331.14   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
331.15   Hand and arm signals.
331.16   Right of way at intersections.
331.17   Right of way when turning left.
331.18   Operation of vehicle at yield signs.
331.19   Operation of vehicle at stop signs.
331.20   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
331.21   Right of way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle.
331.211     Report of vehicle failing to yield right of way to public safety
vehicle.
331.22   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway:  duty to yield.
331.23   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway: stopping at
sidewalk.
331.24   Right of way of funeral procession.
331.25   Driver's view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons.
331.26   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
331.27   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
331.28   Driving over fire hose.
331.29   Driving through safety zone.
331.30   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
331.31   Driving upon divided roadways.
331.32   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
331.33   Obstructing intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing.
331.34   Failure to control; weaving; full time and attention.
331.35   Occupying a moving trailer or manufactured or mobile home.
331.36   Squealing tires, “peeling”, cracking exhaust noises.
331.37   Driving upon sidewalks, street lawns or curbs.
331.38   Stopping for school bus; discharging children.
331.39   Driving across grade crossing.
331.40   Stopping at grade crossing.
331.41   Shortcutting; avoiding traffic control devices.
331.42   Littering from motor vehicle.
331.43   Wearing earplugs or earphones prohibited.
331.44   Vehicular operation on street closed due to rise in water level.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
313.01
Operation of bicycles and motorcycles - see TRAF.
373.01 et seq.
School bus operation - see OAC Ch. 4501-3
 
331.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in subsection (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under subsection (a) (2) hereof.
   This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.25)
331.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.26)
331.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) hereof,
signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.  When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided street or highway as defined in
Section
331.31, a limited access highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 5511.02 or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.27)
331.04  OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting such movement in safety.  The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.28)
331.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless such
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made,
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken.  In every event the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for
traffic approaching from the opposite direction before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.29)
331.06  ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel;
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side or
under the conditions described in Section
331.01(a)(2). 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.30)
331.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   Hazardous zones, commonly called "no passing zones," shall consist of
an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed parallel to
the normal center line or marked lane line.  When the auxiliary yellow line
appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel and to the right of the
normal center line or marked lane line, no driver shall drive across the
auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction.  When auxiliary yellow lines appear on both sides of the normal
center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding in either direction shall
not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to overtake  and pass another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction.  No driver shall, at any other time,
drive across the yellow auxiliary line when it appears in the driver's lane of
travel, except to make a lawfully permitted left-hand turn under the rules
governing such movement.  No passing signs may also be erected facing traffic
to indicate the beginning and end of each no passing zone.
   When appropriate signs or markings indicating hazardous or no passing zones
are in place and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the
directions of the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distance set out in
Section
331.06. 
   
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply when all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Section
331.05, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.31)
331.08  DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic or wherever traffic is lawfully moving in two or more
substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following rules
apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from such lane
or line until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made
with safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly
visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
when preparing for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.33)
331.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when
traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
such space without danger.  This paragraph does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade, shall maintain a sufficient space
between such vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space
without danger.  This paragraph shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.34)
331.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the
roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane of
the roadway being entered lawfully available to the traffic moving in that
lane.
      (4)   Markers, buttons or signs may be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that
specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection,
and when such markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle
shall turn such vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required
by such markers, buttons or signs.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.36)
331.11  TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private road or
driveway, alley or building to yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully
using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, private
road, driveway or building.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
331.12  "U" TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
313.03 and subsection (b) hereof, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the
crest of a grade, if the vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver
of any other vehicle approaching from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction.  This subsection applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell.  This subsection does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.37)
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no vehicle shall be
turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or
upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or
controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit
such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the street and without interfering with the
safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.37)
331.13  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and while
backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on the
street or highway.
   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:  in a rest area;
in the performance of public works or official duties; as a result of an
emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.38)
331.14  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway
unless and until such person has exercised due care to ascertain that the
movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a bicycle
or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not
required to be continuous.  A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is not
required to make a signal if the bicycle or electric bicycle is in a designated
turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed
for the safe operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver
of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give a
signal.
   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both
approaching and following traffic intention to turn or move right or left,
except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four inches, or when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of
the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one side
only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to
operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.39)
331.15  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, all signals required by
this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side
of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as
follows:
      (1)   Left turn:  Hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn:  Hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed:  Hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to subsection (a)(2) hereof, a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right
hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle or electric
bicycle. 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.40)
331.16  RIGHT OF WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right of way rule declared in subsection (a) hereof, is modified
at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code and Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4511.
(ORC 4511.41)
   (c)   Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, when two
vehicles approach or enter a junction of two or more alleys from different
directions at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.41)
331.17  RIGHT OF WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right
of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, whenever the
approaching vehicle is within the intersection or so close to the intersection,
alley, private road or driveway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.42)
331.18  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.  After
slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways.  Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima-facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.43(B))
331.19  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it.  After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.43(A))
331.20  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.03)
331.21  RIGHT OF WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the street clear of any intersection,
and stop and remain in that position until the public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the street.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171.  As used in this section,
“coroner’s vehicle” means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell capable of
giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or Section
331.211, whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense.  On a second offense
within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 4511.45)
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
331.211 REPORT OF VEHICLE FAILING TO YIELD RIGHT OF WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY
VEHICLE.
   (a)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-of-way
to a public safety vehicle as required by Section
331.21(a) impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an
emergency, any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the
license plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator
of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the
area where the alleged violation occurred.
   (b)   (1)   Upon receipt of a report under subsection (a) of this section,
the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to determine
or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation.
      (2)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged violation
of Section
331.21(a) is established, the law enforcement agency has probable cause to
issue either a written warning or a citation for that violation, and the agency
shall issue a written warning or a citation to the operator.
      (3)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation.  However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates Section
331.21(a) based on a report filed under subsection (a) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
      (2)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of Section
331.21(a) based on a report filed under subsection (a) of this section does not
enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s right to contest
the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court to answer the
charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person
committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report
appears in person in the court and testifies.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “License plate” includes any temporary license placard issued under
Ohio R.C. 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.
      (2)   “Public safety vehicle” does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or a vehicle used
by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the Public Utilities Commission.  (ORC 4511.454)
         (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
331.22  DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY: DUTY TO YIELD.
   (a)   Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the operator of
a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley or from any place
other than another roadway shall yield the right of way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.44)
331.23  DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY: STOPPING AT
SIDEWALK.
   (a)   Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the driver of a
vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a
business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley,
building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area,
shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic thereon.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.431)
331.24  RIGHT OF WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section "funeral procession" means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Section
 331.21 or when directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the
operators of all vehicles shall yield the right of way to each vehicle that is
a part of a funeral procession.  Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral
procession lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in
the procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection
notwithstanding any traffic control devices or right-of-way provisions of this
Traffic Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to
avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.451)
331.25  DRIVER'S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)    No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70(A),(B),(D))
331.26  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close such street or highway.
   (b)    Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.71)
331.27  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.72)
331.28  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Chief or fire
official in command, be driven over any unprotected fire hose that is laid down
on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.73)
331.29  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.60)
331.30  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.  A vehicle passing
around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the rotary
traffic island. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.32)
331.31  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any street has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any such dividing space, barrier or median section, except
through an opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. 
This section does not prohibit the occupancy of such dividing space, barrier or
median section for the purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an
order of a police officer. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.35)
331.32  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
331.33  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION, CROSSWALK OR GRADE CROSSING.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.712)
331.34  FAILURE TO CONTROL; WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle without exercising reasonable and
ordinary control over such vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle in a weaving or zigzag course unless
such irregular course is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vehicle without giving his full time and
attention to the operation of such vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
331.35  OCCUPYING A MOVING TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME.
   (a)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile
home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.701)
331.36  SQUEALING TIRES, "PEELING," CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   (a)   No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no
person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a
manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped
position that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise
unusual to its normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or
leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly called "peeling".
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
331.37  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, STREET LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an electric
bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except
upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.  (ORC 4511.711)
   (b)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
(ORC 4511.711)
331.38  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; DISCHARGING CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed.
   It is no defense to a charge under this subsection (a) hereof that the
school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically
extended stop warning sign as required by subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771, and an automatically extended
stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, which
shall be actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus
is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies.  A school bus
driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in
designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway
or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by
community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental
disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children
attending programs offered by head start agencies are boarding or unloading at
curbside.  The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be synchronized or
otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies.  The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with subsection (a) hereof.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies  on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Head start agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      (2)   “School bus”, as used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and
displays the markings described in Ohio R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has fifteen or more children aboard at
any time.  “School bus” does not include a van owned and operated by a head
start agency, irrespective of its color, lights, or markings. 
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).  A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of subsection (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in division (a)(7) of Ohio R.C.
4510.02.  When a license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor
shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or
clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court’s action.  (ORC 4511.75)
331.39  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade  crossing, the person shall stop within fifty feet, but not less than
fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, if any of the following
circumstances exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (a)(1)A. to F. of this section exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 4511.62)
331.40  STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to
be placarded under 49 CFR Parts 100-185, before crossing at grade any track of
a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and, while so stopped, shall listen through
an open door or open window and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and
shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping, looking and
listening as required by this section.  Upon proceeding, the operator of such a
vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there will be no necessity
for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall not shift gears
while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when the Ohio Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in this subsection.
         A.   Any local authority may file an application with the Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing.  Upon receipt of such a request,
the Commission shall authorize a limited period for the filing of comments by
any party regarding the application and then shall conduct a public hearing in
the community seeking the exempt crossing designation.  The Commission shall
provide appropriate prior public notice of the comment period and the public
hearing.  By registered mail, the Commission shall notify each railroad
operating over the crossing of the comment period.
         B.   After considering any comments or other information received, the
Commission may approve or reject the application.  By order, the Commission may
establish conditions for the exempt crossing designation, including compliance
with division (b) of 49 C.F.R. Part 392.10, when applicable.  An exempt
crossing designation becomes effective only when appropriate signs giving
notice of the exempt designation are erected at the crossing as ordered by the
Commission and any other conditions ordered by the Commission are satisfied.
         C.   By order, the Commission may rescind any exempt crossing
designation made under this section if the Commission finds that a condition at
the exempt crossing has changed to such an extent that the continuation of the
exempt crossing designation compromises public safety.  The Commission may
conduct a public hearing to investigate and determine whether to rescind the
exempt crossing designation.  If the Commission rescinds the designation, it
shall order the removal of any exempt crossing signs and may make any other
necessary order.
      (3)   As used in this section:
         A.   “School vehicle” means any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
         B.   “Bus” means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer
to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver, or carries
sixteen or more passengers, including the driver.
         C.   “Exempt crossing” means a highway rail grade crossing authorized
and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under subsection (a)(2) hereof
at which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this
section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (a)(4), whoever
violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of subsection (a) hereof or Ohio R.C. 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
similar to any of those sections, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  (ORC 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   When authorized stop signs are erected at railroad grade
crossings, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within fifty but not less
than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall
exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing. 
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
this subsection (b)(1) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
331.41  SHORTCUTTING; AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property
marked with signs "No Through Traffic" or words of similar import for the
purpose of passing from one roadway to another roadway or location, unless
otherwise directed by a uniformed law enforcement officer at the time.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property
for the purpose of avoiding compliance with a traffic control device, unless
otherwise directed by a uniformed law enforcement officer at the time.
   (c)   It shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section for
the operator of a vehicle to cross public or private property as provided
herein without using the service of such property, stopping the engine or both.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
331.42  LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, "litter" means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.82)
331.43  WEARING EARPLUGS OR EARPHONES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.  As used in this section, "earphones" means any
headset, radio, tape player or other similar device that provides the listener
with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a device
attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. 
"Earphones" does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built
into protective headgear.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire personnel and emergency medical service personnel while on
duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any street or highway; or
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.84)
331.44  VEHICULAR OPERATION ON STREET CLOSED DUE TO RISE IN WATER LEVEL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to two thousand
dollars ($2,000).
   (b)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of subsection (a)
hereof is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must appear in
person in the proper court to answer the charge.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Section
501.99 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of
law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall order the offender
to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any such rescurer incurred in
rescuing the person, excluding any cost of transporting the rescued person to a
hospital or other facility for treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative
maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000).  If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred.  A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under division (B) of Ohio R.C.
2929.28, a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner as
provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization,” “firefighting agency,”
and “private fire company” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (2)   “Rescuer” means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
service, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
         (ORC 4511.714.)
CHAPTER 333
OVI; Willful Misconduct; Speed
333.01   Driving or physical control while under the influence.
333.02   Operation in willful or wanton disregard of safety.
333.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
333.031   Approaching a stationary public safety, emergency, or road service
vehicle.
333.04   Stopping vehicle; slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
333.05   Speed limitations over bridges.
333.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
333.07   Street racing prohibited.
333.08   Operation without reasonable control.
333.09   Operation in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or
property. (Repealed)
333.10   Operation in violation of immobilization order.
333.11   Texting while driving prohibited.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Drug of abuse defined - see Ohio R.C. 3719.011(A)
Alcohol defined - see Ohio R.C. 4301.01(B)(1)
Alteration of prima-facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22(B),
4511.23
Failure to control vehicle - see TRAF.
331.34
Walking on highway while under the influence - see TRAF.
371.09
 
333.01  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (a)   (1)   Operation Generally.  No person shall operate any vehicle within
this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following
apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one per
cent or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one per cent by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths of one
percent or more but less than two hundred four-thousandths of one percent by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one gram or
more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per
two hundred ten liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one gram
or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram by
weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person’s urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one per
cent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths of
one percent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood
serum or plasma.
         H.   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one
gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person’s
breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight-
thousandths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in subsection (m) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least five hundred nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred nanograms of amphetamine
per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite
per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least two thousand nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least twenty-five nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s
urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person's urine of at least fifteen nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person's urine of at least thirty-five nanograms of marihuana metabolite
per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
fifty nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least five hundred nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred
nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount
of salvinorin  A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and
salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s
blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of
operating any vehicle within this Municipality, the rule is in effect, and the
person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that
amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood,
or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within twenty years of the conduct described in
subsection (a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this Municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in subsection (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C.
4511.191, and being advised by the officer in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4511.192 of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission to the test
or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
 
   (b)   Operation After Under-Age Consumption.  No person under twenty-one
years of age shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the
time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
per cent but less than eight-hundredths of one per cent by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one
per cent but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one per cent by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
gram but less than eight-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of the person’s breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-
thousandths of one gram but less than eleven-hundredths of one gram by weight
of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person’s urine.
 
   (c)   One Conviction Limitation.  In any proceeding arising out of one
incident, a person may be charged with a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or
(a)(2) and a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, but
the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
subsections.  (ORC 4511.99)
 
   (d)   Physical Control.
      (1)   As used in this subsection, “physical control” means being in the
driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the
vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   A.   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the
time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
            2.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in subsection
(a)(1)B., C., D. or E. hereof.
            3.   Except as provided in subsection (d)(3) of this section, the
person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in
subsection (a)(1)J. hereof.
         B.   No person under twenty-one years of age shall be in physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them or while the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in
subsection (b)(1) to (4) hereof.
      (3)   Subsection (d)(2)A.3. of this section does not apply to a person
who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of
a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in subsection (a)(1)J. hereof, if both of the
following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
 
   (e)   Evidence; Tests. 
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of (a)(1)A. of this section or for any equivalent offense, that is
vehicle-related the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and
analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2317.02, may be
admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation.  The three-hour time limit
specified in this subsection regarding the admission of evidence does not
extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.192(A) as
the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test
or tests as described in that section.
            The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs
of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this section when a person
submits to a blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance test at the request
of a law enforcement officer under Ohio R.C. 4511.191, or a blood or urine
sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.  Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical  technician-paramedic or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma.  This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens.  A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this subsection may refuse to withdraw blood
under this subsection, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
            The bodily substance withdrawn under subsection (e)(1)B.  hereof
shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health
by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3701.143.
         C.   As used in subsection (e)(1)B. of this section, “emergency
medical technician-intermediate” and “emergency medical technician-paramedic”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for
violation of subsection (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that
is vehicle related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn
a concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
in subsections (a)(1)B., C., D. and E. of this section, or less than the
applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)J. of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.  This
subsection does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of subsection (b) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to that subsection.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis.
         If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to subsection (e)(1)B. 
hereof, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a
qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing
administer a chemical test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to
any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer.  If the person
was under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191, the
arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the
person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person’s own
expense.  If the person was under arrest other than described in division (A)
(5) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191, the form to be read to the person to be tested, as
required under Ohio R.C. 4511.192, shall state that the person may have an
independent test performed at the person’s expense.  The failure or inability
to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the
admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the
request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in subsections (e)(4)B. and C. of this section,
“national highway traffic safety administration” means the National Traffic
Highway Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C.A.
105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of subsection (a), (b) or (d) of this section, of a municipal
ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol,
a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasmabreath or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator or person in physical
control of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear
and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial
compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally
accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were
administered, including, but not limited to, any testing standards then in
effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all
of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
subsection (e)(4)B.1. or 2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Subsection (e)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
subsection, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by subsection (e)(4)B. of this section.  (ORC 4511.19; 4511.194)
 
   (f)   Forensic Laboratory Reports. 
      (1)   Subject to subsection (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (a)
(1)B., C., D., E., F., G., H., I., or J. or (b)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of
those subsections, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a
permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this
subsection that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the
information specified in this subsection shall be admitted as prima-facie
evidence of the information and statements that the report contains.  The
laboratory report shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in subsection (f)(1) of this
section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or,
if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in subsection (f)(1) of this section
shall not be prima-facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the
report.  The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the
interest of justice.
 
   (g)   Immunity From Liability For Withdrawing Blood.  Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, any physician, registered nurse, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant
to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid
station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this
section or Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability
and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other
claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing
blood from the person.  The immunity provided in this subsection also extends
to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency medical
technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws
blood under this section.  The immunity provided in this subsection is not
available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engaged in willful or
wanton misconduct.
      As used in this subsection, “emergency medical technician-intermediate”
and “emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 4765.01.
 
   (h)   General OVI Penalty. 
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of subsections (a)(1)A. to I. or (a)
(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them.  Whoever violates
subsection (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while
under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance.  The court shall sentence the offender for either
offense under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, and this Traffic Code, except as
otherwise authorized or required by subsections (h)(1)A. to E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (h)(1)B., C., D. or
E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of
subsections (a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail
term of three consecutive days.  As used in this subsection, three consecutive
days means seventy-two consecutive hours.  The court may sentence an offender
to both an intervention program and a jail term.  The court may impose a jail
term in addition to the three-day mandatory jail term or intervention program. 
However, in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense
exceed six months.
               The court may suspend the execution of the three-day jail term
under this subsection if the court, in lieu of that suspended term, places the
offender under a community control sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.25 and
requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers’
intervention program certified under Ohio R.C. 5119.38.
               The court also may suspend the execution of any part of the
three-day jail term under this subsection if it places the offender under a
community control sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.25 for part of the three
days, requires the offender to attend for the suspended part of the term a
drivers’ intervention program so certified, and sentences the offender to a
jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days that the
offender does not spend attending the program.  The court may require the
offender, as a condition of community control and in addition to the required
attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, to attend and satisfactorily
complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum
standards adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental
Health and Addiction Services that the operators of the drivers’ intervention
program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to
the court on the offender’s progress in the programs.  The court also may
impose on the offender any other conditions of community control that it
considers necessary.
               If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time
offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by
the court under subsection (h)(1)A.1. of this section for the offense apply,
except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term
imposed by the court under subsection (h)(1)A.1. of this section upon granting
unlimited driving privileges in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.022.
            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided
in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of at least three consecutive days
and a requirement that the offender attend, for three consecutive days, a
drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5119.38. 
As used in this subsection, three consecutive days means seventy-two
consecutive hours.  If the court determines that the offender is not conducive
to treatment in a drivers’ intervention program, if the offender refuses to
attend a drivers’ intervention program, or if the jail at which the offender is
to serve the jail term imposed can provide a drivers’ intervention program, the
court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term of at least six
consecutive days. 
               If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time
offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by
the court under subsection (h)(1)A.2. of this section for the offense apply,
except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term
imposed by the court under subsection (h)(1)A.2. of this section upon granting
unlimited driving privileges in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.022.
               The court may require the offender, under a community control
sanction imposed under Ohio R.C. 2929.25, to attend and satisfactorily complete
any treatment or education  programs that comply with the minimum standards
adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, in addition to the required attendance at drivers’
intervention program, that the operators of the drivers’ intervention program
determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the
court on the offender’s progress in the programs.  The court also may impose
any other conditions of community control on the offender that it considers
necessary.
            3.   In all cases, a fine of not less than three hundred seventy-
five dollars ($375.00) and not more than one thousand seventy-five dollars
($1,075).
            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for a
definite period of one to three years.  The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock
device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as
authorized under Ohio R.C. 4510.022.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of subsection (a) or (b) of
this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail term of ten
consecutive days.  The court shall impose the ten-day mandatory jail term under
this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it
instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term
and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol
monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring.  The court may impose a jail term in addition to the ten-day
mandatory jail term.  The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall
not exceed six months.
               In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with
electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of
monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed
by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by Ohio R.C.
5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the
offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider.  The
purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender’s alcohol
usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted.  Upon the request
of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment
to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses
related to alcohol use.
            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided
in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of twenty consecutive days.  The
court shall impose the twenty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection
unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a
sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of
house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or
with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court
may impose a jail term in addition to the twenty-day mandatory jail term.  The
cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months.
               In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with
electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of
monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed
by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by Ohio R.C.
5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the
offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider.  The
purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender’s alcohol
usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted.  Upon the request
of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment
to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses
related to alcohol use.
            3.   In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section
303.99, a fine of not less than five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) and
not more than one thousand six hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,625).
            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of one to
seven years.  The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the
suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.  (ORC 4511.19)
            5.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s
name, immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for ninety days in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and impoundment of the license plates of
that vehicle for ninety days.  (ORC 4511.193)
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of subsection (a) or (b) of
this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor.  The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail term of
thirty consecutive days.  The court shall impose the thirty-day mandatory jail
term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this
section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both
a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with
continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court may impose a jail term in addition to
the thirty-day mandatory jail term.  Notwithstanding the jail terms set forth
in Section
303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative
jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year.
            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection
(a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, a mandatory jail term of
sixty consecutive days.  The court shall impose the sixty-day mandatory jail
term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this
section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both
a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest with continuous
alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring.  The court may impose a jail term in addition to the sixty-day
mandatory jail term.  Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in
Section
303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative
jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year.
            3.   In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section
303.99, a fine of not less than eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) and not
more than two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750).
            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of two to
twelve years.  The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the
suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.  (ORC 4511.19)
            5.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s
name, criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Subsection (h)(5) of this section applies regarding
any vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under this
subsection.  (ORC 4511.193)
            6.   In all cases, the court shall order the offender to
participate with a community addiction services provider authorized by Ohio
R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the
offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider.  The
operator of the services provider shall determine and assess the degree of the
offender’s alcohol dependency and shall make recommendations for treatment. 
Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results
of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and
clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use.
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or four violations of subsection (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within
twenty years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony of the fourth
degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony of the third degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
subsection (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section as a result of the conviction or guilty
plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in division (F)(2) of Ohio R.C.
4511.191.
      (3)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under subsection (h)
(1)B.1. or 2. or (h)(1)C.1. or 2. of this section and if, within sixty days of
sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record
that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is
required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that
term within the sixty-day period following the date of sentencing, the court
may impose an alternative sentence under this subsection that includes a term
of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring,
or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.
         As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days
required by subsection (h)(1)B.1. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to five consecutive days in jail and not
less than eighteen consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the five consecutive
days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed six
months.  The five consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or
consecutively to the period of house arrest.
         As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of twenty consecutive
days required by subsection (h)(1)B.2. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to ten consecutive days in jail and not
less than thirty-six consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the ten
consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring  shall
not exceed six months.  The ten consecutive days in jail do not have to be
served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest.
         As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days
required by subsection (h)(1)C.1. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to fifteen consecutive days in jail and
not less than fifty-five consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the
fifteen consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring  shall
not exceed one year.  The fifteen consecutive days in jail do not have to be
served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest.
         As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of sixty consecutive days
required by subsection (h)(1)C.2. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to thirty consecutive days in jail and
not less than one hundred ten consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the
thirty consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall
not exceed one year.  The thirty consecutive days in jail do not have to be
served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest.
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under subsection (h) of
this section and if Ohio R.C. 4510.13 permits the court to grant limited
driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges in
accordance with that section.  If division (A)(7) of that section requires that
the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must
display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 4503.231.
      (5)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under this section is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or
(3) of Ohio R.C. 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other
penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the
vehicle as determined by publications of the national auto dealers
association.  The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be distributed in
accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.
      (6)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under subsection (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during
or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under
subsection (h) of this section.
      (7)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
subsection (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (8)   As used in subsection (h) of this section, “electronic monitoring”,
“mandatory prison term” and “mandatory term of local incarceration” have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
 
   (i)   Vehicle Operation After Underage Alcohol Consumption Penalty.  Whoever
violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle after
underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.
         The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the
suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.  The court may grant unlimited
driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension
and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under Ohio R.C.
4510.022.  If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under Ohio R.C.
4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under subsection (i)(1)
of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of subsection (a)
or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.  In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in division (A)(4) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  The court may grant limited
driving privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and
4510.13.
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1416 and if the court
imposes a jail term for the violation of subsection (b) of this section, the
court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant
to division (E) of Ohio R.C. 2929.24.
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28, in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or
after committing the violation of subsection (b) of this section.  (ORC
4511.19)
 
   (j)   Physical Control Penalty.  Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is
guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to other sanctions imposed, the
court may impose on the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  (ORC 4511.194)
 
   (k)   Compliance With Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 Standards.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119
by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a driver’s intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program.  However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s indigent drivers’ alcohol
treatment fund.
 
   (l)   Appeal Does Not Stay Operation of License Suspension.  If a person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended under this section files an appeal regarding
any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay
the operation of the suspension.
 
   (m)   Subsection (a)(1)J. of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that subsection, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
 
   (n)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in subsection (a)(1)J. of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
 
   (o)   Conflict of Terms.  All terms defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 apply to
this section.  If the meaning of a term defined in Ohio R.C . 4510.01 conflicts
with the meaning of the same term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or this
Traffic Code, the term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 applies to this
section.  (ORC 4511.19)
 
   (p)   Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund.  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
of any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be deposited
into the municipal or county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4511.193.  (ORC 4511.193)
 
   (q)   Definitions.  As used in this section:
      (1)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19;
         B.   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         C.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of division (A)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08 or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         E.   A violation of division (A)(2), (3) or (4) of Ohio R.C. 2903.06,
division (A)(2) of Ohio R.C. 2903.08, or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07, or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions
or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact
found that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 1547.11;
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
State while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this State with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C.
1547.11;
         I.   A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or division (A) or (B)
of Ohio R.C. 1547.11;
      (2)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of three,
six, ten, twenty, thirty, or sixty days that must be imposed under subsection
(h)(1)A., B. or C. upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (a)
hereof and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.21 to 2929.28, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   “Municipal OVI ordinance” and “municipal OVI offense” mean any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum, or plasma, breath or urine.
      (4)   “Community residential sanction”, “continuous alcohol monitoring”,
“jail”, “mandatory prison term”, “mandatory term of local incarceration”,
“sanction” and “prison term” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (5)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4506.01.
      (6)   “Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related” means an equivalent
offense that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in subsection (q)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5)
hereof;
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19;
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A)  or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19.
            (ORC 4511.181) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
333.02  OPERATION IN WILLFUL OR WANTON DISREGARD OF SAFETY.
   (a)     No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.  (ORC
4511.20)
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property
other than streets or highways, in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of
persons or property.
   This subsection does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on
public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits
such operation thereon. 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.201)
   (d)   Whenever a person is found guilty under this section of operating a
motor vehicle in violation of this section relating to reckless operation, the
trial court of any court of record, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may impose a class five suspension of the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.
(ORC 4510.15)
333.03  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit the person to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima-facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21 by the Ohio Director of
Transportation or Council, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the
same at a speed not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when twenty miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected;
except, that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way
line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be
governed by subsection (b)(4) hereof and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by
            subsection (b)(7) hereof.  The end of every school zone may be
marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone.  Nothing in this section or in
the manual and specifications for a uniform system of traffic control devices
shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs equipped
with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours in
which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, "school" means any school chartered
under Ohio R.C. 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding
year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08
of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents
of the school's pupils certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards
for nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing
to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone.
         C.   As used in this section, "school zone" means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway.  Upon request from the Municipality for streets and highways under its
jurisdiction, the Ohio Director of Transportation may extend the traditional
school zone boundaries.  The distances in subsections (b)(1)C.1. to 3. hereof
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combinations thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of highway;
Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the Director's initial
action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at the traditional
school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property lines, except when
those boundaries are extended as provided in subsections (b)(1)A. and C.
hereof.
         D.   As used in this subsection, "crosswalk" has the meaning given
that term in Section
301.09.  The Director may, upon request by resolution of Council, and upon
submission by the Municipality of such engineering, traffic and other
information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school zone on any
portion of a  State route lying within the Municipality that includes a
crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school during
recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a
straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of the crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet.  Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
on each approach direction of the State route;
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
Municipality, except on State routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all State routes or through highways
within the Municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
subsections (b)(4) and (5) hereof;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the Municipality;
      (5)   Fifty miles per hour on State routes within the Municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima-facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (6)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the Municipality;
      (7)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the Municipality other than freeways as provided in subsection
(b)(10) and (12);
      (8)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all portions of rural divided highways;
      (9)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on rural expressways without traffic control signals;
      (10)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all rural freeways.
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a
municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt;
      (12)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times  on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt;
   (c)   It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in subsection (b)(1)A. to  (b)(6) hereof, or any declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities and
it is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in
subsection (d) hereof.  No person shall be convicted of more than one violation
of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one
provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a single
affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding fifty-five miles per hour, except upon a
highway, expressway or freeway as provided in subsection (b)(8), (9), (10) and
(12) hereof;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding sixty miles per hour upon a highway as
provided in subsection (b)(8) hereof;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding sixty-five miles per hour upon an expressway
as provided in subsection (b)(9) hereof, except upon a freeway as provided in
subsection (b)(10) hereof;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding seventy miles per hour upon a freeway as
provided in subsection (b)(10) hereof;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   In every charge of violation of this section the affidavit and warrant
shall specify the time, place and speed at which the defendant is alleged to
have driven, and in charges made in reliance upon subsection (c) hereof also
the speed which subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section declares is prima-facie lawful at the time
and place of such alleged violation, except that in affidavits where a person
is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit the person to
bring the vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead the
affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which the defendant is
alleged to have driven.
   (f)   When a speed in excess of both a prima-facie limitation and a
limitation in subsection (d) hereof is alleged, the defendant shall be charged
in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation indicated of
both subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities, and
of the limitation in subsection (d) hereof.  If the court finds a violation of
subsection (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to this section has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction
under such subsection and dismiss the charge under subsection (d) hereof.  If
it finds no violation of subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof or a limit
declared or established pursuant to this section, it shall then consider
whether the evidence supports a conviction under subsection (d) hereof.
   (g)   Points shall be assessed for violation of a limitation under
subsection (d) hereof in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or this section, the
speed limitations as established herein have been altered, either higher or
lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required,
operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set
forth on such signs.  It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed the
speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (i)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Interstate system" has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C.A. 101.
      (2)   "Commercial bus" means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (3)   "Noncommercial bus" includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   “Outerbelt” means a portion of a freeway that is part of the
interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal
corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (5)   “Rural” means outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance
with 23 USC 101, and outside of a business or urban district.
   (j)   (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (j)(1)B., (1)C., (2)
and (3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section or of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section or of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or of any provision
of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to Ohio R.C. 4511.21 and
operated a motor vehicle faster than thirty-five miles an hour in a business
district of a municipal corporation, faster than fifty miles an hour in other
portions of a municipal corporation, or faster than thirty-five miles an hour
in a school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation.  No court shall impose a fine of
two times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this subsection and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine. 
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
         (ORC 4511.21)
333.031 APPROACHING A STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY, EMERGENCY OR ROAD SERVICE
VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Section
337.16, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a street or
highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same
direction of travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall
proceed with due caution and, if possible with due regard to the road, weather,
and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to
that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service
vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities
Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of a type
described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling
on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so
would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by subsection (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Section
303.99(b), upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle in violation
of subsection (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation. 
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply.  The designation of this offense
as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.  (ORC 4511.213)
 
333.04  STOPPING VEHICLE; SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.22(B), the minimum speed
limit of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway has been declared
and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required,
operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set
forth on such signs.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle below the speed
limits posted upon such signs except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with law.
   
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.22)
333.05  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a street at a speed which is greater then the
maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such structure is posted with authorized signs stating such maximum
speed.  Such signs shall be erected and maintained at a distance of at least
100 feet before each end of such structure.
   (b)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of the determination of the maximum speed and the existence of such signs
shall constitute prima-facie evidence of the maximum speed which can be
maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
 303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.23)
333.06  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima-facie speed limitations set forth in Section
333.03 do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they
are responding to emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least
one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and when the
drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle.  This
section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway.  (ORC 4511.24)
333.07  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, “street racing” means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to out-distance each other or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds.
   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of
vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants.  The operation of two or
more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful
speeds established by Section
333.03 or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of
street racing.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street or highway in this Municipality. 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege for not less than thirty days or more than three years.  No judge
shall suspend the first thirty days of any suspension of an offender’s license,
permit, or privilege imposed under this subsection.  (ORC 4511.251)
333.08  OPERATION WITHOUT REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.202)
333.09  OPERATION IN WILLFUL OR WANTON DISREGARD OF THE SAFETY OF PERSONS OR
PROPERTY. (REPEALED)
   This section was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 18-306, passed
December 4, 2018.
333.10  OPERATION IN VIOLATION OF IMMOBILIZATION ORDER.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
   (b)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
subsection (a) hereof shall be criminally forfeited in accordance with the
procedures contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(ORC 4503.236)
333.11  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based
communication.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a
law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld
electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the
person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is
outside a lane of travel;
      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number
in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of
making or receiving a telephone call;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the
operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information,
including emergency, traffic or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the
motor vehicle;
      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;
      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;
      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a
device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or
reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device
or a feature or function of the device;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications
device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or
function of the vehicle.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (a) of this section has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement
officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being
operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.204 does not preclude
a prosecution for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
based on the same conduct.  However, if an offender is convicted of  or pleads
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.204 and is also convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based
on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device” includes any of the
following:
         A.   A wireless telephone;
         B.   A text-messaging device;
         C.   A personal digital assistant;
         D.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         E.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text.
      (2)   “Voice-operated or hands-free device” means a device that allows
the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate, or deactivate a feature or
function.
      (3)   “Write, send or read a text-based communication” means to manually
write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless
communications device, including manually writing or sending,  or reading
communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic
mail.
         (ORC 4511.204)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 335
Licensing; Accidents
335.01   Driver’s license or commercial driver’s license required.
335.02   Permitting operation without valid license; one license permitted.
335.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit; curfew.
335.031   Driving with probationary license; curfew.
335.032   Use of electronic wireless communication device prohibited while
driving.
335.04   Certain acts prohibited.
335.05   Wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
335.06   Display of license.
335.07   Driving under suspension or license restriction.
335.071   Driving under OVI suspension.
335.072   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension.
335.073   Driving without complying with license reinstatement requirements.
335.074   Driving under license forfeiture or child support suspension.
335.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
335.09   Display of license plates.
335.10   Expired or unlawful license plates.
335.11   Use of illegal license plates; transfer of registration.
335.111   Registration within thirty days of residency.
335.12   Stopping after accident upon streets; collision with unattended
vehicle.
335.13   Stopping after accident upon property other than street.
335.14   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Deposit of driver's license as bond - see Ohio R.C. 2937.221
Motor vehicle licensing law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
Driver's license law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507
Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4510
State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4510.03.6
State accident reports - see Ohio R.C. 4509.01(J), 4509.06,  4509.74, 5502.11
Motorized bicycle operator's license - see Ohio R.C. 4511.521
Glass removal from street after accident  - see TRAF.
311.01
 
335.01  DRIVER'S LICENSE OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person
has a valid driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507.  The license shall be
in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
 
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
subsection (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
subsection (a)(2) of this section.  The person charged with a violation of
subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima-facie evidence.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.  When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division
(A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27,
the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a
term of community service of up to five hundred hours.
The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by
the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of
Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of Ohio
R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is a
minor misdemeanor.  If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
 
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under subsection (c)(2) hereof, if within
three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was expired for
more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C.
4510.02.
(ORC 4510.12)
335.02  PERMITTING OPERATION WITHOUT VALID LICENSE; ONE LICENSE PERMITTED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507
or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (b)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's
endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until he
surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to him by another
jurisdiction recognized by the State of Ohio.  No person shall be permitted to
have more than one valid license at any time. 
(ORC 4507.02)
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor.  When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division
(A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000) and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the
offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a
term of community service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02
that may be filed in the underlying case.  If, within three years of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two
or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4507.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.02; 4507.99)
335.021 OHIO DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED FOR IN STATE RESIDENTS.
   (a)   Any person who becomes a resident of this State, within thirty days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license issued by another
state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a Deputy Registrar.  If such a
person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways,
the person shall apply for a driver’s license in this State.  If the person
fails to apply for a driver’s license within thirty days of becoming a
resident, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this Municipality
under a license issued by another state.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   The offense established under subsection (b)(1) of this section is
a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20.  The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
   (c)   For purposes of subsection (a) of this section, “resident” means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person maintains their principal residence in this State and
does not reside in this State as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States Armed Forces.
      (2)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be a
resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio R.C.
4507.01. 
(ORC 4507.213)
335.03  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT; CURFEW.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the following conditions:
      (1)   If the permit is issued to a person who is at least fifteen years
six months of age, but less than sixteen years of age:
         A.   The permit and identification card are in the holder’s immediate
possession;
         B.   The holder is accompanied by an eligible adult who actually
occupies the seat beside the permit holder and does not have a prohibited
concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A);
         C.   The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the
total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor
vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (2)   If the permit is issued to a person who is at least sixteen years
of age:
         A.   The permit and identification card are in the holder’s immediate
possession;
         B.   The holder is accompanied by a licensed operator who is at least
twenty-one years of age and is actually occupying a seat beside the driver and
does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A);
         C.   The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the
total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor
vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no holder of a temporary
instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that is issued
on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of eighteen years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and six a.m.
   The holder of a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) on or after July 1,
1998, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, may operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and six
a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the
holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian or custodian
holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this
State and is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder, and does not
have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Section
333.01(a).
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Eligible adult” means any of the following:
         A.   An instructor of a driver education course approved by the
Department of Education or a driver training course approved  by the Department
of Public Safety;
         B.   Any of the following persons who holds a current valid driver’s
or commercial driver’s license issued by this State:
            1.   A parent, guardian or custodian of the permit holder;
            2.   A person twenty-one years of age or older who acts in loco
parentis of the permit holder.
      (2)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263. 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.05)
335.031 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE; CURFEW.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and six a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for twelve months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to subsection (c)(1) of this section, subsection (a)
(1)A. of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and
six a.m. provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and six a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and six a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Subsection (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of one a.m. and
five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a  probationary driver’s license with
the written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section.
The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve
as the written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section,
and employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events,
and holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may
choose to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of
that subsection.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family
member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is
accompanied by the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or
B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed that
required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a motor
vehicle in violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or B. of this section; or the
holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of seventeen years and the person pleads guilty to, is
convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving
violation during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the
person is issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction
over the violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months
or the date the holder attains the age of seventeen years, whichever occurs
first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under subsection (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that subsection.  In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted.  If a person is convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a
second or subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this
division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by subsection (d) hereof, or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons if the requirement in that subsection has been or is being
violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person
for a violation of that requirement.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or B. hereof has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for such violation.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
      (2)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether or the whole or half blood  or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.
      (3)   “Moving violation” means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys on
the highways or streets.  “Moving violation” does not include a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
violation of any statute or ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of
vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or
vehicle registration.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.071)
335.032 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE PROHIBITED WHILE
DRIVING.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of eighteen years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall
drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).  In addition, the court shall impose a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or permit for a definite period
of sixty days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined three hundred dollars ($300.00).  In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or
permit for a definite period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.205 does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a
violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same
conduct.  However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 and is also adjudicated
a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct, the two
offenses are allied offenses of similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, “electronic wireless communications device”
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
         (ORC 4511.205)
335.04  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display or represent as one's own, any identification card,
driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit, or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact, or present any physician's
statement required under Ohio R.C. 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to
be false or fictitious. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (ORC 4507.30)
335.05  WRONGFUL ENTRUSTMENT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or this Traffic Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5)
of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the
offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section
if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(1), (3) or (5) of this section, the offender and the operator of
the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity
or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle and shall be punished as provided in subsections (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except
that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not
be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3)
of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of
that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. 
The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by
the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of
Ohio R.C. 2705.02.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or
been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of Ohio
R.C. 4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) or (5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under Section
303.99, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02, and, if the vehicle involved
in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court may order
one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3)B. or C. of this
section, the court may order, for thirty days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates.  If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C.
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.203  or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the court may order, for sixty days, the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s
license plates.  If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio
R.C. 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.203 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal forfeiture to
the state of the vehicle involved in the offense.  If issued, the order shall
be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture
under this subsection is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of
Ohio R.C. 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty
established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as
determined by publications of the national automobile dealer’s association. 
The proceeds from any fine imposed under this subsection shall be distributed
in accordance with division (C)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
   (d)   If a court orders the immobilization of a vehicle under subsection (c)
of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle from the
immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered
unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility
with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
subsection (c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order.  The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination.  If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person
to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action
that involves the offender or delinquent child who is the subject of the
conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from the wrongful entrustment
of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(ORC 4511.203)
335.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved.  When a demand is
properly made and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license.  A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license
on or about the person’s person shall be prima-facie evidence of the person’s
not having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, whoever violates
this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail
term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C.
2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and,
notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be
ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community
service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a
term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in
the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C.
4507.35 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC 4507.35)
335.07  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Except as provided under subsection (b) hereof and Sections
335.072 and
335.074, no person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, other than Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable
law in any other jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was
issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking within this Municipality during the period of
suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is
operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving
privileges.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this Municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under division (D) of
Ohio R.C. 4506.10 or under Ohio R.C. 4507.14.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of subsection (b) of this section.  The
person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may
offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) hereof, is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C.
4510.02.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in subsection (d)(2)B. or C. of this
section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the
offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or Ohio R.C. 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for thirty days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for thirty
days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         B.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or any combination
of two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or Ohio R.C. 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of
a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for sixty days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for sixty days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         C.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.11, or any
combination of three or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4501.11 or Ohio R.C.
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
State.
   (e)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall
be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. 
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (f)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Upon receipt of the copy of the order
from the court, neither the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy
registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of
registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the
declaration of forfeiture.  The period of registration denial shall be five
years after the date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having
jurisdiction of the offense that lead to the  order terminates the forfeiture
and notifies the Registrar of the termination.  The Registrar shall then take
necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased
by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
   (g)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this
section.  (ORC 4510.11)
   (h)   Any person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender
under this section and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle
upon any public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point
suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the
offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the
first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this subsection. (ORC
4510.037)
335.071 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of the
suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension.  The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter
2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days.  The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to subsection (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than thirty consecutive days of
house arrest with electronic monitoring.  A period of house arrest with
electronic monitoring imposed under this subsection shall not exceed six
months.  If the court imposes amandatory three-day jail term under this
subsection, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided
that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed
six months.
         B.   A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000).
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days.  Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year.  The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to subsection (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than ninety
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring.  The period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year.
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days. 
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, the court
may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year.  The
court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term.
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section.
   (c)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest with
electronic monitoring under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section unless,
within sixty days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding
on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the date
of sentencing.
   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house arrest with
electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that period.
   (d)   Fifty per cent of any fine imposed by a court under subsection (b)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the county indigent drivers
alcohol treatment fund or municipal indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund
under the control of that court, as created by the county or municipal
corporation pursuant to division (H) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191.
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.
   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.231, on the
vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in division (B) of
that section.
   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall be
concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under Ohio R.C.
3123.58 or 4506.16.  No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under
this section for which the offender is sentenced.  (ORC 4510.14)
   (g)   (1)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4510.14, the
court, in addition to and independent of any sentence that it imposes upon the
offender for the offense, if the vehicle the offender was operating at the time
of the offense is registered in the offender’s name, shall do whichever of the
following is applicable:
         A.   If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has not
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.14 or
former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall
order the immobilization for thirty days of the vehicle involved in the offense
and the impoundment for thirty days of the license plates of that vehicle in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         B.   If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.14 or
former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall
order the immobilization for sixty days of the vehicle involved in the offense
and the impoundment for sixty days of the license plates of that vehicle in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         C.   If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C.
4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02 or a municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court
shall order the criminal forfeiture to the State of the vehicle the offender
was operating at the time of the offense.
      (2)   An order for immobilization and impoundment of a vehicle under this
section shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C 4503.233 and
4507.02, as applicable.  The court shall not release a vehicle from
immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with
current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (3)   An order for criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under this section
shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Upon receipt of a copy
of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a
Deputy Registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer
of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the
declaration of forfeiture.  The period of registration denial shall be five
years after the date of the order unless, during that period, the court having
jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and
notifies the Registrar of the termination.  The Registrar then shall take the
necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased
by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
         (ORC 4510.161)
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic monitoring” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
      (2)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to subsection (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially
equivalent to subsection (a) of this section.
      (3)   “Jail” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (4)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of three,
ten, or thirty consecutive days that must be imposed under subsection (b)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of
subsection (a) of this section and in relation to which all of the following
apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
            (ORC 4510.14)
335.072 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle
within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period
of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4509.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this
Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be
operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period in which the
person is required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this Municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of subsection (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (b) of this
section.  The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this
section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in subsection (d) hereof.  Whoever violates subsection (b)
of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
and shall be punished as provided in subsection (d) hereof.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail
term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C.
2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and,
notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be
ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community
service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a
term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in
the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.16,
or any combination of two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.16 or Ohio R.C. 4510.11
or 4510.111, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this
section.  (ORC 4510.16)
   (e)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of financial
responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce any document
or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications device that
is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a peace officer
upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial responsibility made
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101.  Whoever violates this subsection (e)
hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC
4509.102)
335.073 DRIVING WITHOUT COMPLYING WITH LICENSE REINSTATEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima-facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) hereof.  The
person charged with a violation of subsection (a) hereof may offer evidence to
rebut this prima-facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor.  When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division
(A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27,
the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a
term of community service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02
that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.21(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C.
4510.02. 
(ORC 4510.21)
335.074 DRIVING UNDER LICENSE FORFEITURE OR CHILD SUPPORT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this Municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license has
been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22  or 4510.33.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this section.  The person
charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima-facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (c) of this
section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.  The offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division
(A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27,
the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a
term of community service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02
that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of subsection (A) of
Ohio R.C. 4510.111, or any combination of two or more violations of subsection
(A) of Ohio R.C. 4510.111, or Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
         (ORC 4510.111)
335.08  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this Municipality
knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of
common pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of a court of
common pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction
or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 and Chapter
4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle the ownership of which is not evidenced
by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for
the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title
assignments that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an
odometer disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86
Stat.  961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle knowing that the
certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise
reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition. 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(ORC 4505.18)
335.09  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle a
license plate that bears the distinctive number and registration mark assigned
to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.19 and 4503.191, as follows:
         A.   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of
an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed
motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer or semitrailer shall
display a license plate on the rear only.
         B.   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display
the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial
tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the
front of the commercial tractor.
         C.   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only
on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles.
      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under Ohio R.C. 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle.  No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
 
   (b)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation or
summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle if
the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either
places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket, citation,
or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense.
 
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section by failing to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor vehicle as
required under subsection (a) of this section while the motor vehicle is
otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         A person who is subject to the penalty prescribed in subsection (c)(2)
of this section is not subject to the charging of points under Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
      (3)   The offense established under subsection (a) of this section is a
strict liability offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply.  The designation
of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense. 
(ORC 4503.21)
335.10  EXPIRED OR UNLAWFUL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle which is parked or
operated upon the public streets or highways shall fail to annually file the
application for registration or to pay the tax therefor, as required by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4503. 
(ORC 4503.11)
   (b)   No person shall operate, drive or park upon the public streets or
highways a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the
motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.  (ORC
4549.11)
   (c)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of Ohio
shall operate, drive or park the motor vehicle upon the public streets or
highways, while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark issued
by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws of
Ohio relating to the registration and identification of motor vehicles. 
(ORC 4549.12)
   (d)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which is displayed an expired license plate or an expired
validation sticker.
   (e)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each
subsequent offense.
      (3)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
         (ORC 4549.11; 4549.12)
335.11  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES; TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)    No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the streets in
this Municipality if it displays a license plate or a distinctive number or
identification mark that meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Is fictitious;
      (2)   Is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   Belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section does
not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this
Municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates that originally
were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the same person
who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this
Municipality, during the thirty-day period described in subsection (c) hereof.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.08)
 
   (c)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner shall immediately remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle.  The transfer of the registration and,
where applicable, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they
originally were issued to a succeeding motor vehicle purchased by the same
person in whose name the original registration and license plates were issued
shall be done within a period not to exceed thirty days.  During that thirty-
day period, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they originally
were issued may be displayed on the succeeding motor vehicle, and the
succeeding motor vehicle may be operated on the streets of the Municipality. 
 
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4503.12)
335.111 REGISTRATION WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF RESIDENCY.
   (a)   Within thirty days of becoming a resident of this State, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this State.  If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this Municipality under a license issued by another state.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   The offense established under subsection (b)(1) of this section is
a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20.  The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
   (c)   For purposes of subsection (a) of this section, “resident” means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person maintains their principal residence in this State and
does not reside in this State as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States Armed Forces.
      (2)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be a
resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio R.C.
4507.01.  (ORC 4503.111)
335.12  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON STREETS; COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED
VEHICLE.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision.  The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under subsection (a)(1) of this section,
the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the
nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision,
and the operator’s name, address and the registered number of the motor vehicle
the operator was operating.  The operator shall remain at the scene of the
accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the
scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an
ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(b)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  No judge shall suspend the
first six months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this subsection.
   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to provide that proof
of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during or after committing the offense charged under this section.  (ORC
4549.02)
335.13  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON PROPERTY OTHER THAN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision.  Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in subsection (a)(1) of
this section, the operator shall give that information, within twenty-four
hours after the accident or collision, to the Police Department.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under subsection (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident.  Except as otherwise provided
in subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02. No judge shall suspend the
first six months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this subsection.
   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to provide that proof
of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(ORC 4549.021)
335.14  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage
to real property, or personal property attached to real property, legally upon
or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and
if available, shall exhibit the driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located after
reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident resulting
in damage to the property, within twenty-four hours after the accident, shall
forward to the police authority in the municipality in which the accident or
collision occurred, the same information required to be given to the owner or
person in control of the property and give the location of the accident and a
description of the damage insofar as it is known.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of failure
to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to provide that proof
of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense charged under this section.  (ORC 4549.03)
CHAPTER 337
Safety and Equipment
 
337.01   Driving unsafe vehicles.
337.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
337.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
337.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
337.05   Rear red reflectors.
337.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
337.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
337.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads.
337.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
337.10   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required.
337.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
337.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
337.13   Display of lighted lights.
337.14   Use of headlight beams.
337.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles.
337.16   Number of lights; limitations on flashing, oscillating or rotating
lights.
337.17   Focus and aim of headlights.
337.18   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
337.19   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
337.20   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
337.21   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
337.22   Windshield and windshield wiper; sign or poster thereon.
337.23   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
337.24   Motor vehicle stop lights.
337.25   Air cleaner required.
337.26   Child restraint system usage.
337.27   Drivers and passengers required to wear seat belts.
337.28   Use of sunscreening, nontransparent and reflectorized materials.
337.29   Bumper heights.
337.30   Directional signals required.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways - see Ohio R.C.
4513.28
Slow moving vehicle emblem - see OAC Ch. 4501.13
Motorized bicycle lights and equipment - see Ohio R.C. 4511.521
Vehicle lighting - see OAC 4501-15
Use of stop and turn signals - see TRAF.
331.14
Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
339.05
Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
339.06
Towing requirements - see TRAF.
339.07
Use of studded tires and chains - see TRAF.
339.11
Bicycle equipment - see TRAF.
373.05 et seq.
 
337.01  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any street any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on vehicles
do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or
agricultural tractors except as made applicable to such articles of machinery. 
(ORC 4513.02)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
337.02  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as required by
this chapter during all of the following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the street or highway are not discernible at a distance of one thousand feet
ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights meeting
the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C.
4511.521.  No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall
be operated upon a street or highway using only parking lights as illumination.
   (b)   Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lights and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lights or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted street under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (c)   Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway to stop the vehicle solely because the officer observes that
a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section has been or is being committed
or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a
violation of that subsection, or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that subsection.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.03)
337.03  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with
at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of the
motor vehicle.
   (b)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than
two headlights. 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.04)
337.04  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)     Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with
at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the
case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rear-most vehicle need
be visible from the distance specified.
   (b)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
fifty feet to the rear.  Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate. 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.05)
337.05  REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on
a street, other than vehicles of the type mentioned in Section
337.06 or a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached,
shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lights or separately, two
red reflectors of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be
visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to fifty feet from such
vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.06)
337.06  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   Buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any street, shall be equipped with clearance
lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop lights as required by State
regulations.  Such equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in Section
337.02 except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted
on a vehicle operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object on the street at a distance of 500 feet.
   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically
required by Section
337.02 to Section
337.15, inclusive.  Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Public
Utilities Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.07)
337.07  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   (a)   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during
the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by
reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by
another vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this section does
not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the
front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all
lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.08)
337.08  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Section
337.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the side and rear.  The red light or lantern required by this section
is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.  At any other
time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag
or cloth not less than sixteen inches square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.09)
337.09  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended during the times mentioned in Section
337.02, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lights which shall
exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance
of 500 feet to the rear.  No lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle
when it is stopped or parked where there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street. 
Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(ORC 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
337.10  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED.
   (a)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in Section
337.01(c), not specifically required to be equipped with lights or other
lighting devices by Section
337.02 to
337.09, shall at all times specified in Section
337.02, be equipped with at least one light displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle, and
also shall be equipped with two lights displaying red light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an
alternative, one light displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlights.
   Lights and reflectors required or authorized by this section shall meet
standards adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or the
Municipal or County Engineer, when such construction area is marked in
accordance with requirements of the Director and the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09, which is designed for
operation at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less shall be operated at
a speed not exceeding twenty-five miles per hour, and shall display a
triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV).  The emblem shall be mounted so as
to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear.  The Ohio
Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem.  The standards and
specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate with
and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers.
   A unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at
a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour may be operated on a street or
highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour provided it is
operated in accordance with this section.
   As used in this subsection (b), "machinery" does not include any vehicle
designed to be drawn by an animal.
   (c)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn
vehicles, and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in subsection (b) hereof
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway.  Its use on slow-
moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other
type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (d)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in
subsection (b) hereof, except those units designed to be completely mounted on
a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1,
1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting
device as specified in subsection (b) hereof.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour unless the unit
displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in subsection (b) of this
section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications
contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE
S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS).
   (e)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined as a
slow-moving vehicle in subsection (b) of this section, in addition to the use
of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five
miles per hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol may
be equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of
not less than one thousand feet to the rear at all times specified in Section
337.02.  When a double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the
front and red light to the rear.
   In addition to the lights described in this subsection, farm machinery and
motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or
rotating amber light, as permitted by Section
337.16, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning
lights, as permitted by that section.
   (f)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times
be equipped in one of the following ways:
      (1)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with subsection (b)
hereof;
      (2)   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under this subsection (f);
      (3)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in this subsection (f).
   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the position of
mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this subsection
(f).  The rules shall permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material
to be black, gray or silver in color.  The alternate reflective material shall
be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible at all times
specified in Section
337.02, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated
by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
   (g)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour shall display a
slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification
symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway.  The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate. 
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this subsection.
   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is being operated on a
street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour and is
towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm
machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification
symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on
the agricultural tractor.
   (h)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is being operated on
a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour, the
operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the
manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
   (i)   As used in this section, "boat trailer" means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour
or less. 
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.11)
337.11  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spotlight and
every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another
vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed
to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor
more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
   (b)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three State
approved auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle, which
when used shall conform to State regulations.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.12)
337.12  COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights or
lights on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without
glare.
   (b)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light.  No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.13)
337.13  DISPLAY OF LIGHTED LIGHTS.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in Section
337.02 at least two State approved lighted lights shall be displayed conforming
to State regulations, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle,
except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights
on parked vehicles.  (ORC 4513.14)
   (b)   However, on a motorcycle, there shall be displayed at least one and
not more than two lighted lights as required herein.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.14)
337.14  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Section
337.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles
and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, except
that upon approaching an oncoming vehicle, the lights or beams shall be so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.15)
337.15  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
Section
337.02 when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects seventy-five feet ahead in
lieu of lights required in Section
337.13, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess
of twenty miles per hour. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.16)
337.16  NUMBER OF LIGHTS; LIMITATIONS ON FLASHING, OSCILLATING OR ROTATING
LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights also is equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, not more than
a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted
at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, shall
be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five feet from the
vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or
passing.  This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service
vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection
vehicles actively collecting garbage, refuse, trash or recyclable materials on
the roadside, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles transporting preschool
children as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.182, highway maintenance vehicles,
funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the
Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing,  oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or
machinery permitted by Section
 337.10 to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in
subsection (c)(1) hereof does not apply to such machinery or vehicles.  Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in Section
337.10.
   (d)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
Section
301.27, or a school bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit
to stand within the right of way of any public street or highway any vehicle or
equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a flashing
combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red light, or a
combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except a public
law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and
traffic laws of the State or Municipality, operating a public safety vehicle
when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon, or permit to stand
within the right of way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that
is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a
flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue
light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light. 
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility.  This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights either on farm machinery or vehicles
escorting farm machinery, when used on a street or highway. 
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.17)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
337.17  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Section
337.02 to
337.16, inclusive, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless the
lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance
with State regulations. 
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in federal motor vehicle safety standard number
108, 49 C.F.R. 571.108.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this subsection.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.19)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
337.18  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold such motor vehicle, including two separate
means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply
the brakes to at least two wheels.  If these two separate means of applying the
brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles manufactured or
assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle
without brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be
equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by
foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the streets or highways of this Municipality,
the following vehicles shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle designed to be applied by the
driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and
connected so that, in case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes
shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of two thousand pounds
or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
two thousand pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of three thousand pounds or more that is
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate
brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two
wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. 
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular
effort or by spring action or by equivalent means.  Their operation may be
assisted by the service brakes or other sources of power provided that failure
of the service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will
not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements.  The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once
applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite
exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes.  If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
   (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be
capable at all times and under all conditions of loading of being stopped on a
dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
 
                          From a speed of 20 miles
                          per hour
                          Stopping distance  Deceleration in feet per second
                          in feet            per second
  Brakes on all wheels   30                 14
  Brakes not on all four 40                 10.7
wheels
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.  (ORC 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
337.19  HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street shall be equipped with
a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible,
under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet.
   (b)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon
a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell.  Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal.  Every emergency or public safety vehicle shall be
equipped with a siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type
approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.  Such equipment shall not be
used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in
which case the driver of the emergency or public safety vehicle shall sound
such equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of
the approach thereof. 
   (c)   No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give warning
to other drivers or pedestrians.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  (ORC 4513.21)
337.20  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine
shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order
and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person
shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a
highway.  Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates.
   (b)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
other way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any
portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust
of an internal combustion engine under normal operation. 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.22)
337.21  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the street to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle.  Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a
clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles or
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles or
motorcycles by mirror. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.23)
337.22  WINDSHIELD AND WINDSHIELD WIPER; SIGN OR POSTER THEREON.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway, other
than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width.  No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when in accordance with
federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger compartment
and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without moving any
part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of
the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield
wipers.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield.  The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.24)
337.23  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street with any load
carried on such vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle's left side.  (ORC 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99)
337.24  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with two or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop light.  Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights.  Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear, provided that in the
case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most vehicle need
be visible from the distance specified.
   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the rear
of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the operator to
diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be
constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not originally
manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.071)
337.25  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an internal combustion
engine unless the carburetion system of the vehicle is protected with an air
filter, a flame arresting device, or any other accepted method of protection
that is adequate for this purpose.  If the original device or system is
replaced, it shall be replaced with one that is equal to or better than the
original equipment.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a person doing automotive repair work
on a motor vehicle that necessitates this device being removed while the work
is performed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
337.26  CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM USAGE.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by subsection (a) or (b) of
this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in
a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio R.C. 5104.011, that
is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped
with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the
motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older that
fifteen years of age and who is not otherwise required by subsection (a), (b)
or (c) hereof to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section, and absent another
violation of law, a law enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual
inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not
be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or
(d) of this section has been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or an occupant restraining device as
required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section.  This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in
this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who
otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical
impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person
operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in
accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted
on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section shall
be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a motor
vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system, booster
seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred
at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed to be a
single violation of this section:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (j)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or of a state
law or municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those
subsections, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.(ORC
4511.81)
337.27  DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS REQUIRED TO WEAR SEAT BELTS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Automobile" means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
"National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966," 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C.A. 1392.
      (2)   "Occupant restraining device" means a seat safety belt, shoulder
belt, harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an
operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
Federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
   (3)   "Passenger" means any person in an automobile, other than its
operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining
device is provided.
      (4)   "Commercial tractor," "passenger car," and "commercial car" have
the same meanings as provided in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (5)   "Vehicle" and "motor vehicle", as used in the definitions of the
terms set forth in subsection (a)(4) hereof, have the same meanings as provided
in Chapter
301.
      (6)   “Tort action” means a civil action for damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property.  “Tort action” includes a product liability
claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71 and an asbestos claim, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach
of contract or another agreement between persons.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless that person
is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator's seat unless that person is wearing
all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
subsection (b)(3) hereof is wearing all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device;
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that person is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device;
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Subsection (b)(3) hereof does not apply to a person who is required by
Section
337.26 to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.  Subsection
(b)(1) hereof does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United
States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during any
period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to
deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.  Subsections (b)(1) and (3) hereof do
not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to
practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed
to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the
person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (b) hereof has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for
a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution
of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer
shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on
any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation
of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (e)   All fines collected for violations of subsection (b) hereof shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit as provided in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
   (f)   (1)   Subject to subsection (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a
person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of subsection (b)(1) or (3) or the failure of a
person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an automobile being
operated by that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device, in violation of subsection (b)(2)  of
this section, shall not be considered or used by the trier of fact in a tort
action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.  But the trier of
fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio rules of
evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action
and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that represents noneconomic
loss, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.011 in a tort action thatcould have been
recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the available elements
of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.  Evidence of that failure
shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other
than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible
as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution
for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.     It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the
occupant.
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car.
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be
fined thirty dollars ($30.00).
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
subsection (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates subsection (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (ORC 4513.263)
337.28  USE OF SUNSCREENING, NONTRANSPARENT AND REFLECTORIZED MATERIALS.
   (a)   Requirements.
      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State with any
sunscreening material, or other product or material which has the effect of
making the windshield or windows nontransparent or would alter the windows’
color, increase its reflectivity, or reduce its light transmittance, unless the
product or material satisfies one of the following exceptions:
      A.   Any manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or
windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the
manufacture of the motor vehicle until such standard is subsequently repealed
or reduced.  In "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205)
"manufacturer" means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of
motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, including any person importing motor
vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale.  "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 205" (FMVSS), Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 571,
can be obtained online at web site http://www.gpo.gov.
      B.   Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to
the windshield when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of
such window, has a light transmittance of not less than seventy per cent plus
or minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in color.
         C.   Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to
the side windows to the immediate right or left the driver, so long as such
material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of such
windows, has a light transmittance of not less than fifty per cent plus or
minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in color.
      D.   Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to a
window not otherwise listed in subsections (a)(1)A. to C. or E. of this
section, except that outside left and right rear view mirrors are required if
the sunscreening material is applied to the rear window and the sunscreening
material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing material of such
window, has a light tranmsmittance of less than fifty per cent plus or minus
three per cent.
      E.   Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied along
the top of the windshield and that does not extend downward beyond the AS-
1 line or five inches from the top of the windshield, whichever is closer to
the top, is not regulated by this section.
      (2)   No person shall install in any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the specifications of this section.
      (3)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to
conform to the specifications of this section.
      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
      (5)   No person shall operate on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State that is equipped
with privacy drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds unless the drapes, louvers,
curtains or blinds are open and secure during vehicle operation.
      (6)   All motor vehicles, beginning with the 1990 model year, must be
equipped with labels identifying sunscreening material.  All sunscreening
material must indicate the manufacturer’s name and the percentage level of
light transmission of the material permanently installed between the material
and the surface to which the material is applied or affixed.  Such label must
be legible and must be placed in the lower left-hand corner of the vehicle
window when viewed from the outside.  (OAC 4501-41-03)
   (b)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:
      (1)   A motor vehicle registered in this State in the name of a person,
or the person's parent, legal guardian or spouse who has an affidavit signed by
a physician licensed to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or
an affidavit signed by an optometrist licensed to practice in this State under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4725 that states that the person has a physical condition
that makes it necessary to equip such motor vehicle with sunscreening material
which would be of a light transmittance and/or luminous reflectance in
violation of this section.  Such affidavit shall be in the possession of the
person so afflicted or the driver at all times while in the motor vehicle;
      (2)   The windows to the rear of the driver in chauffeured limousines as
defined herein;
      (3)   The windows to the rear of the driver in those vehicles designed
and used to transport corpses which include hearses and other vehicles adapted
for such use; and
      (4)   The manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or
windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the
manufacture of the motor vehicle as provided in subsection (a) hereof. 
"Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205), Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 49, Part 571, can be obtained online at web site http://
www.gpo.gov.  (OAC 4501-41-05)
   (c)   Definitions.  As used in this section, certain terms are defined as
follows:
      (1)   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as specified in Section
301.20.
      (2)   "Sunscreening material" means products or materials, including
film, glazing and perforated sunscreening, which, when applied to the
windshield or windows of a motor vehicle, reduce the effects of the sun with
respect to light reflectance or transmittance.
      (3)   "Transmittance" means the ratio of the amount of total light,
expressed in percentages, which is allowed to pass through the product or
material, including glazing, to the amount of total light falling on the
product or material and the glazing.
      (4)   "Windshield" means the front exterior viewing device of a motor
vehicle.
      (5)   "Window" means any device designed for exterior viewing from a
motor vehicle, except the windshield or any roof-mounted viewing device.
      (6)   "Manufacturer" unless otherwise specified in this section, means
any person who engages in the manufacturing or assembling of sunscreening
products or materials or any person who fabricates, laminates or tempers a
safety glazing material, incorporating, during the manufacturing process, the
capacity to reflect or reduce the transmission of light.
      (7)   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that is designed to
carry nine or fewer passengers and is operated for hire on an hourly basis
pursuant to a prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on
public roads and highways along a route under the control of the person hiring
the vehicle and not over a defined and regular route.  “Prearranged contract”
means an arrangement, made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation
from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour or
trip.  “Chauffeured limousine” does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
         (OAC 4501-41-02)
   (d)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.241)
337.29  BUMPER HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   "Passenger car" means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (2)   "Multipurpose passenger vehicle" means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (3)   "Truck" means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
      (4)   "Manufacturer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (5)   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating established for the vehicle.
      (6)   "Body floor height" means the vertical distance between top of the
frame rail and the bottom of the passenger compartment (cab) floor.  In the
event that the vehicle is a truck body, floor height will be measured by the
vertical distance between the passenger compartment (cab) floor and the floor
of the truck bed.
      (7)   "Bumper height" means the vertical distance between the ground and
the highest point of the bottom of the bumper, measured when the vehicle is
laden on a level surface with the vehicle tires inflated to the manufacturer's
recommended pressure.
      (8)   "Frame" means the main longitudinal structural members of the
chassis of the vehicle or, for vehicles with unitized body construction, the
lowest main longitudinal structural members of the body of the vehicle.
   (9)   “Wheel track distance” means the distance on the ground between the
center of the tire tread on one side of the vehicle, and the center of the tire
tread on the opposite side.  (OAC 4501-43-02)
   (b)   Prohibitions; Application.
      (1)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this State that does not
conform to the requirements of this section.
      (2)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this State
in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact
with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the
wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person
shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to
defeat the safe operation of that system including the installation ofinverted,
altered or modified suspension system component parts which results in
elevation of the height of the vehicle bumper or frame unit which is not in
compliance with this section.
      (3)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State without a
bumper on the front and rear of the vehicle if such vehicle was equipped with
bumpers as standard equipment by the manufacturer.
      (4)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State if the
difference in height between the body floor and the top of the frame exceeds
four inches.
      (5)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
either of the following:
         A.   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this State of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs as long as such equipment does not cause
the vehicle to be in violation of this section;
         B.   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
      (6)   This section does not apply to any specially designed or modified
passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a
street or highway in races and similar events.
      (7)   A specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck which does not conform to this section shall not be
operated on a street or highway.
         (OAC 4501-43-03)
   (c)   Specifications.
      (1)   The horizontal bumper shall be at least 4.5 inches in vertical
height, centered on the vehicle's centerline, and extend no less than the width
of the respective wheel track distances.  Bumpers shall be horizontal load
bearing bumpers and attached to the vehicle frame to effectively transfer
impact when engaged.
      (2)   Maximum bumper heights shall be determined by the type of vehicle
at time of manufacture.  If other than a passenger vehicle, the maximum bumper
height shall be determined by the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) at the
time of manufacture.  The height shall be measured in terms of the vertical
distance between the ground and the bottom of the bumper.  Maximum bumper
heights are as follows:
 
                               Front (inches) Rear (inches)
Passenger Vehicles             22             22
All Other Vehicles:
4,500 lbs. and under GVWR   24             26
4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR  27             29
7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28             31
      (3)   If the body and/or truck bed height is altered the difference in
height between the body floor and/or the truck bed floor to the top of the
frame rail shall not exceed four inches.
      (4)   For any vehicle with bumpers or attaching components which have
been modified or altered from the original manufacturer's design in order to
conform with the maximum bumper requirements of this section, the bumper height
shall be measured from a level surface to the bottom of the vehicle frame rail
at the most forward and rearward points of the frame rail.  Frame rail height
if bumper modified or altered: 
 
                               Front (inches) Rear (inches)
Passenger Vehicles             22             22
All Other Vehicles:
4,500 lbs. and under GVWR   24             26
4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR  27             29
7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28             31
      (5)   The height restriction in this subsection (c) applies to the
distance from the ground to the bottom of the frame rail under any one or more
of the following conditions:
         A.   A motor vehicle is not equipped with a front and rear bumper.
         B.   The bumper height relative to the frame rails has been altered.
         C.   A supplemental bumper has been installed or an addition to the
original or replacement has been made.
            (OAC 4501-43-04)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99)
337.30  DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (b)   “Directional signals” means an electrical or mechanical signal device
capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to
the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear.
   (c)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in Section
337.02. 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.261)
CHAPTER 339
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
 
339.01   Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on State routes; State
permit.
339.02   Use of local streets; local permit and conditions.
339.03   Maximum width, height and length.
339.04   Route and load information.
339.05   Wheel protectors.
339.06   Vehicles transporting explosives.
339.07   Towing requirements.
339.08   Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud.
339.09   Shifting load; loose loads.
339.10   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
339.11   Use of studded tires and chains.
339.12   Park traffic restricted.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Weighing vehicle; removal of excess load - see Ohio R.C. 4513.33
Arrest notice of driver - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
Slower moving vehicles to be driven in right-hand lane - see TRAF.
331.01(b)
 
339.01  OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE OPERATION ON STATE ROUTES; STATE PERMIT.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles
of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in Ohio
R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in conformity with Ohio
R.C. 4513.01 to 4513.37, inclusive, upon any State route within the
Municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by the Ohio
Director of Transportation, or upon any local truck route.  Every such permit
shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers
and shall be open to inspection by any police officer.
   No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be
required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or charge
for movement on any State route within the Municipality; however, it shall be
unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any
roadway within the Municipality which is not a State route, except as provided
in Section
339.02.  (ORC 4513.34)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
339.02  USE OF LOCAL STREETS; LOCAL PERMIT AND CONDITIONS.
   (a)     Use of Local Streets.  No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a
size as specified in Section
339.03 or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon any street in the
Municipality other than a State route, except those local streets designated as
a truck route and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when
such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the
usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate
business or act other than passage through the Municipality.  Operators of
vehicles so deviating from either a State route or a designated truck route
within the Municipality shall confine such deviation to that required in order
to accomplish the purpose of the departure.
   (b)   Local Permit and Conditions.  Upon application and for good cause, the
City Manager may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets.
   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the Ohio
Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction; however, the approval
of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement upon
State routes as provided in Section
339.01.
   The City Manager may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or for such
period of time, not to exceed one year, as the City Manager in his discretion
deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction project.  The City
Manager may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of operation for such
vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route, hours, speed or
such other restrictions as may be necessary for the preservation of the public
peace, property, health and safety.  The City Manager may require the posting
of bond or other security necessary to compensate for any damage to a roadway
or road structure.
   For each such permit, the City Manager shall charge five dollars ($5.00),
and for each hour of time or any part thereof spent by each police officer in
supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
ten dollars ($10.00).
   Streets or highways under local jurisdiction shall be posted with
appropriate signs to apprise drivers of the limitations imposed by this
section.  No driver shall disobey the instructions indicated on any such sign.
   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the permit
granted by the City Manager shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit, and denial of request for any future permit.  Such
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalty prescribed by
subsection (c) hereof.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
339.03  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within the Municipality, whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
   (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively within
municipal corporations;
   (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law, for
passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other State roads
with minimum pavement widths of twenty-two feet, except those roads or portions
of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Ohio Director of Transportation;
   (3)   132 inches for traction engines;
   (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated State highways or portions of highways;
   (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such State highways
or portions of State highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
   (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger bus
type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
306.30 to 306.54;
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;
   (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may, by
journal entry, prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such State highways or portions of State highways as
the Director designates;
   (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial
tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer
combination, except that  the Director may prohibit the operation of any such
commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination on such State highways or portions of State highways as
the Director designates;
      (5)   A.   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or State
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or State
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         B.   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations, when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route, or State route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in subsections (c)(3) and (4) and in
subsection (e) hereof;
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   40 feet for all other vehicles except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of thirteen feet six
inches, with or without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of sixty-five feet and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or
stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of seventy-five
feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the
rear of such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front
of such vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the
operation of any stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat
transporter or a B-train assembly on any State highway or portion of any State
highway that the Director designates.
   (f)   The widths prescribed in subsection (b) shall not include side
mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress,
flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant devices,
and load-induced tire bulge.
   The width prescribed in subsection (b)(5) shall not include automatic
covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies,  provided
these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from each side of the
vehicle.
   The lengths prescribed in subsections (c)(2) to (8) hereof shall not include
safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, nonproperty carrying devices or components that do not extend more
than twenty-four inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for
loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second
semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy
conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of
the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying
refrigeration equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers.  In
special cases, vehicles whose dimensions exceed those prescribed by this
section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of
Transportation.
   (g)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or other
vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipal corporation or to the
volunteer fire department of any municipal corporation or used by such
department in the discharge of its functions.  This section does not apply to
vehicles and pole trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal
poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to
farm machinery and equipment.  The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery
or equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of
which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same
on the highways and streets of this State shall comply with the rules of the
Director governing such movement, that the Director may adopt.  Ohio R.C.
119.01 to 119.13 apply to any rules the Director adopts under this section, or
the amendment or rescission of the rules, and any person adversely affected
shall have the same right of appeal as provided in those sections.
   This section does not require the State, the Municipality, County, township
or any railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical
clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or
about existing structures now crossing streets, roads and other public
thoroughfares in the Municipality.
   (h)   As used in this section, “recreational vehicle” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.   
(ORC 5577.05)
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense or subsequent offense, the person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  (ORC 5577.99)
339.04  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon
request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route
they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of
delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods
being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
339.05  WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the streets, bridges and culverts within this Municipality unless such
vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible
flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to
prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water or other
materials on the windshields of following vehicles.  Such protectors or flaps
shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from
the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions
of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they
are protecting.  If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction or other
means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required.  Rear wheels
not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts of the vehicle shall
be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line
of the rearmost axle.  (ORC 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
339.06  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a street
or highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
twenty-four inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white letters six
inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823
of the United States Department of Transportation Regulations.
      (2)   Such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.  (ORC 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
339.07  TOWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby,
and such drawbar or other connection shall not exceed fifteen feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
   (b)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of
a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white
flag or cloth not less than twelve inches square.
   (c)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each
semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth
wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is
being drawn.  The chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to
prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in case the
drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged.  In case of a
loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle.
   (d)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole
and cable dollies operated by a public utility, as defined in Ohio R.C.
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side.  Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less, and
vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
twenty-five miles per hour or less shall have a drawbar or other connection,
including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient
strength to pull all the weight towed thereby.  Only one such vehicle used to
transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided
in this section may be towed or drawn at one time, except as follows:
      (1)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle;
      (2)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage.  No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.  (ORC 4513.32)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
339.08  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; REMOVAL REQUIRED; TRACKING MUD.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other
public place unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose
of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a
roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   (b)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a  moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any street, highway or other public place unless the load is covered
with a sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from
spilling onto the street, highway or other public place.
(ORC 4513.31)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track or drop mud,
stones, gravel or other similar material on any street, highway or other public
place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud, stones, gravel or other similar material or permits the load
or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street, highway or
other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(ORC 4513.31)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
339.09  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body.  All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Section
337.08.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
339.10  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved streets of this Municipality a
traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds,
spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, or
no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved
streets of this Municipality, which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels
equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any
kind.  "Traction engine" or "tractor," as used in this section, applies to all
self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled
by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.  (ORC 5589.08)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99)
339.11  USE OF STUDDED TIRES AND CHAINS.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "studded tire" means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle, and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. 
"Motor vehicle," "street or highway," "public safety vehicle" and "school bus"
have the same meanings as given those terms in Chapter 301.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, no person shall
operate any motor vehicle, other than a public safety vehicle or bus, that is
equipped with studded tires on any street or highway, except during the period
extending from November 1 of each year through April 15 of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
subsection (b)(1) hereof.
   (c)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.  (ORC 5589.081)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99)
339.12  PARK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED.
   (a)   No vehicle designed and used for the transportation of any goods or
property shall be permitted or allowed to enter any of the public parks of the
City, unless the driver or owner of such vehicle shall first have procured a
written permit therefor, from the City Manager.
(Ord. 5215.  Passed 9-4-51.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
CHAPTER 341
Commercial Drivers
 
341.01   Definitions.
341.02   Exemptions.
341.03   Prerequisites to operation of a commercial motor vehicle.
341.04   Prohibitions.
341.05   Criminal offenses.
341.06   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Disqualification - see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
Suspension or revocation of license - see Ohio R.C. 4507.16
Warning devices when disabled on freeways - see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
Arrest notice of driver - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
Load limits - see TRAF. Ch.
339
 
341.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Alcohol concentration" means the concentration of alcohol in a
person's blood, breath or urine.  When expressed as a percentage, it means
grams of alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   "Commercial driver's license" means a license issued in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial
motor vehicle.
   (c)   "Commercial motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle designed or used to
transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport sixteen or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than
sixteen passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended;
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   (d)   "Controlled substance" means all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
"Controlled Substances Act," 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C.A. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (e)   "Disqualification" means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (f)   "Drive" means to drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.
   (g)   "Driver" means any person who drives, operates or is in physical
control of a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial
driver's license.
   (h)   "Driver's license" means a license issued by the Ohio Bureau of Motor
Vehicles that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (i)   "Drug of abuse" means any controlled substance, dangerous drug as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01 or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.
   (j)   "Employer" means any person, including the Federal Government, any
state and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a
commercial motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (k)   “Endorsement” means an authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (l)   “Farm truck” means a truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use
in the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than one
hundred fifty miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its
products, poultry and its products, floricultural and horticultural products,
and in the transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than one
hundred fifty miles, of supplies for the farm, including tile, fence, and every
other thing or commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural,
livestock and poultry production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and
things used for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the
operation of the farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this
subsection and is not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
   (m)   “Fatality” means the death of a person as the result of a motor
vehicle accident occurring not more than three hundred sixty-five days prior to
the date of a death.
   (n)   "Felony" means any offense under federal or state law that is
punishable by death or specifically classified as a felony under the law of
this State, regardless of the penalty that may be imposed.
   (o)   "Foreign jurisdiction" means any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (p)   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination
vehicle.  The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross
vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of
each towed unit.
   (q)   "Hazardous materials" means any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F
of 49 C.F.R. part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   (r)   "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or
semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except
that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or
semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.
   (s)   “Out-of-service order” means a declaration by an authorized
enforcement officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican
jurisdiction declaring that a driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial
motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (t)   “Public safety vehicle” has the same meaning as in divisions (E)(1)
and (3) of Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (u)   “Recreational vehicle” includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (v)   “School bus” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (w)   "State" means a state of the United States and includes the District
of Columbia.
   (x)   “Tester” means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09.
   (y)   "United States" means the fifty states and the District of Columbia.
   (z)   "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
      (ORC 4506.01)
341.02  EXEMPTIONS.
   Section
341.02 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances.  Former Ohio R.C. 4506.02
from which Section
341.02 was derived was repealed by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 68, effective June 29,
2005.  The exemptions are now contained in Section
341.03.
341.03  PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this Municipality unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession,
any of the following:
         A.   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, or
by another jurisdiction recognized by this State;
         B.   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under Ohio
R.C. 4506.13;
         C.   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm-related service industries issued under Ohio R.C. 4506.24;
         D.   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person who has been a resident of this State for thirty days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (b)   Nothing in subsection (a) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, or joint fire district;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle
for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible
unit of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio national guard.  This exception does not apply to United
States reserved technicians.
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes.  “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. 383.5, as
amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923.
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise.
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle.
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (c)   Nothing contained in subsection (b)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule, or regulation of this
State concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.03)
341.04  PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver's
license issued by this State, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order, while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked or canceled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality under
authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this State for thirty days or
longer.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.04)
341.05  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measureable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of four-hundredths of one per cent or more by whole blood or
breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one per cent or more by blood serum
or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of fifty-six-thousandths of one per cent or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
municipal OVI ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or 4511.191;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, canceled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Sections
335.12 to
335.14 or Sections 4549.02 to 4549.03 of the Ohio Revised Code;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute,
or dispose a controlled substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.15)
341.06  EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial motor vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for
the ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer.  The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended, revoked or
canceled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Section
341.05 or Section 4506 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. 
No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a), (b) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section may be assessed a
fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars. 
(ORC 4506.20)
TITLE SEVEN - Parking
Chap.
351.  Parking Generally.
Chap.
353.  Parking Meters.
Chap.
355.  Taxicab Stands.
Chap.
357.  Junk Vehicles.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 351
Parking Generally
 
351.01   Police may remove unattended vehicle which obstructs traffic.
351.02   Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking.
351.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
351.04   Parking on posted private property.
351.05   Angle parking prohibited.
351.06   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
351.07   Unattended vehicle: duty to stop engine, remove key, set brake and
turn wheels.
351.08   Opening vehicle door on traffic side.
351.09   Maximum forty-eight hour parking.
351.10   Parking in narrow streets and alleys.
351.11   Parking for loading only.
351.12   Double parking for loading.
351.13   Parking in bus stops prohibited.
351.14   Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts.
351.15   Parking for advertising prohibited.
351.16   Parking inoperable motor vehicles on private property.
351.17   Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use.
351.18   Parking near curb; handicapped locations on public and private lots
and garages.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Owner nonliability, lease defense - see Ohio R.C. 4511.071
Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle - see TRAF.
303.03
Parking near stopped fire apparatus - see TRAF.
331.27
Lights on parked or stopped vehicles - see TRAF.
337.09
 
351.01  POLICE MAY REMOVE UNATTENDED VEHICLE WHICH OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street,
bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)
351.02  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA-FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima-facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant.  A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
351.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic
control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, curb or street lawn area, except a bicycle and as
provided in subsection (b) hereof;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within thirty feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic control device;
      (9)   Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within twenty feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and,
on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within
seventy-five feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street, or
within a street tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or where the curbing or street is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of
the maximum time limited by signs;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
      (17)   On the grass in any public park.
         (Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand
or park on a sidewalk, a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine
not larger than one hundred and fifty cubic centimeters, or a bicycle or
electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, bicycle
or electric bicycle does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. 
This division does not authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation
of Section
331.37.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.68)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
351.04  PARKING ON POSTED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner, prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.681)
351.05  ANGLE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   "Angle parking" means any parking other than parallel to the adjacent
curb or edge of the roadway.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at
an angle to the curb or edge of any roadway in the City.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.06  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.07  UNATTENDED VEHICLE: DUTY TO STOP ENGINE, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND TURN
WHEELS.
   (a)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the engine,
locking of the ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a motor
vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
      (2)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
      (3)   An emergency vehicle;
      (4)   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.661)
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
351.08  OPENING VEHICLE DOOR ON TRAFFIC SIDE.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70(C), (D))
351.09  MAXIMUM FORTY-EIGHT HOUR PARKING.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle on any of the
public streets or alleys in the City for a longer period than forty-eight
hours.
(Ord. 76-21.  Passed 1-27-76.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.10  PARKING IN NARROW STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand in any alley in a
business district as defined in Section
301.06, except while the person in charge of the vehicle is actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.11  PARKING FOR LOADING ONLY.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any passenger vehicle for any
length of time in any place marked as a loading zone during such times as shall
be designated by the City Manager.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand or park a truck or commercial vehicle for
any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and
delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading
zone during such times as shall be designated by the City Manager.  In no case
shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed twenty minutes.
(Ord. 69-155.  Passed 9-2-69.)
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.12  DOUBLE PARKING FOR LOADING.
   (a)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this Traffic Code and subject to
the following additional condition, trucks, trailers and semitrailers may
double park for the purpose of loading or unloading, but only when a loading
zone within the same block or an open space at the curb within forty-five feet
in either direction from the point of delivery is not available for parking
such vehicle.  The truck, trailer or semitrailer shall not be double parked
opposite any other vehicle lawfully double parked or in such manner that the
movement of traffic upon the street is unreasonably impeded or during such
times as shall be designated by the City Manager.
(Ord. 69-155.  Passed 9-2-69.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.13  PARKING IN BUS STOPS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle in appropriate bus loading and
unloading zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed
necessary for the protection of pedestrians.  Such zones shall be established
by the City Manager and shall be adequately marked and designated.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.14  PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No person shall park a school bus or house vehicle of more than one
ton capacity, commercial tractor, agricultural tractor, truck of more than one
ton capacity; bus, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, boat or boat trailer, or
moving van on any street within the residential zoning districts of the City,
except in an emergency necessitating repairs or when necessary to load or
unload any materials or merchandise.  However, for the loading or unloading of
materials or merchandise, parking shall be authorized for not to exceed one
hour.
(Ord. 68-52.  Passed 4-1-68.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.15  PARKING FOR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street for the
primary purpose of advertising.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
351.16  PARKING INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, “inoperable motor vehicle” shall be
defined as a motor vehicle which cannot legally be operated upon the public
streets for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Lacking major components;
      (2)   Lacking required safety equipment;
      (3)   Unlicensed, or having a licensed expired for more than 30 days;
      (4)   Apparently unsafe or hazardous to those inside or outside of the
vehicle;
      (5)   Damaged beyond economic repair.
   (b)   No person having the right to the possession of any property shall
permit an inoperable motor vehicle to remain parked in the open on such
property for more than seventy-two hours.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to any person lawfully operating a junk
yard, salvage yard or scrap metal processing facility.  Likewise, it shall not
apply to any lawful motor vehicle repair facility which is located in an
appropriate zone, and which stores inoperable vehicles either 100 feet or more
from residential areas and public streets or, in the alternative, screens such
inoperable vehicles completely from public view.
   (d)   Nothing herein provided shall prohibit the open storage or keeping of
an historic motor vehicle or a collector's vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, except that an unlicensed collector's vehicle shall be concealed from
off-premises viewing by means of a building, fencing, vegetation, terrain or
other suitable obstruction.
   (e)   Any motor vehicle found in violation of this section may be impounded
by order of the Chief of Police; provided that prior thereto notice is sent to
the person having the right to possession of the property on which the motor
vehicle is found and requiring that the motor vehicle either be repaired,
placed within a structure, or removed from the property within ten days, and
noting that failure to do shall result in the motor vehicle being impounded. 
Such notice shall be either personally served or sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested.  The ten-day period shall be calculated from the date of
personal service or the date of mailing of the certified mail.
   (f)   Any unclaimed motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall
be disposed of in accordance with law.
   (g)   Whoever continues to violate this section after having been issued a
warning pursuant hereto shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord.  97-315.  Passed 9-9-97.)
351.17  FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
   (a)   The Chief of the Fire Division may designate fire lanes on private
property devoted to public use.
   (b)   Any fire lane established in accordance with subsection (a) above, 
shall be identified by the placement of appropriate signs and other markings.
   (c)   No person shall park a motor vehicle or place any other obstruction
within the fire lane.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section only, “park” means to stop except.
      (1)   To avoid conflict with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
      (2)   In compliance with an order of a peace officer;
      (3)   In compliance with a traffic control device; or
      (4)   For the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or property into
or out of a motor vehicle while actively engaged in such activity, while the
driver remains in the immediate vicinity of the motor vehicle.
   (e)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 08-96.  Passed 4-8-08.)
351.18  PARKING NEAR CURB; HANDICAPPED LOCATIONS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LOTS AND
GARAGES.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb side wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than twelve inches from the curb, unless it
is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be
as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge
and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.
   (b)   (1)   This subsection does not apply to streets or parts thereof where
angle parking is lawfully permitted.  However, no angle parking shall be
permitted on a state route unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than
twenty-five feet is available for free-moving traffic.
      (2)   A.   No angled parking space that is located on a state route
within a municipal corporation is subject to elimination, irrespective of
whether there is or is not at least twenty-five feet of unoccupied roadway
width available for free-moving traffic at the location of that angled parking
space, unless the municipal corporation approves of the elimination of the
angled parking space.
         B.   Replacement, repainting or any other repair performed by or on
behalf of the municipal corporation of the lines that indicate the angled
parking space does not constitute an intent by the municipal corporation to
eliminate the angled parking space.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in subsection (c)(1)B. hereof, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
      B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled
parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction
other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway.  The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked.  Not more than two
motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in
subsection (c)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is
metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any rule, air
compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being used in the
construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of facilities
near, on, over or under a street, may stop, stand or park where necessary in
order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty, or warning signs
or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Ohio Director of
Transportation.
   (e)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces shall be provided and designated by the
Municipality and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and
facilities, where parking is provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at
all publicly owned parking garages.  The locations shall be designated through
the posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable,
imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close
to exits, entrances, elevators and ramps.  All elevated signs posted in
accordance with this subsection and Ohio R.C. 3781.111 (C) shall be mounted on
a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of
the sign shall measure not less than five feet.  If a new sign or a replacement
sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14,
1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next
to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the
offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location
if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under subsection (e) hereof, or at special
clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned parking
lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with
subsection (e) hereof, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates;
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of subsection (f)(1)A. of this section may be towed or
otherwise removed from the parking location by the Police Department.  A motor
vehicle that is so towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until
the owner presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing
and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing
motor vehicles.  If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be
released to the lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is the
lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.
      C.   If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (f)(1)A. of
this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person
suffered an injury not more than seventy-two hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location
provided under subsection (e) of this section or at a special clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that
subsection.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Handicapped person" means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs, or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary or other handicapping condition.
      (2)   "Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4503.44.
      (3)   "Special license plates" and "removable windshield placard" mean
any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially similar license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country or
sovereignty.
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (c) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (f)(1)A.1. or 2. of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in subsection (i)
(2)A. and B. of this section.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)
(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates subsection (f)(1)A.1. or 2. of
this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).  An offender who violates
subsection (f)(1)A.1. or 2. of this section shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either
of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
subsection (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of subsection (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in subsection (f)
(1)A.2. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates subsection (f)(1)A.1.
or 2. of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
An arrest or conviction for a violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1. or 2. of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person’s appearance as a witness. 
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (f)(2) of this section shall be fined
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   In no case shall an offender who violates subsection (f)(2) of this section
be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An arrest or conviction for a
violation of subsection (f)(2) of this section does not constitute a criminal
record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in
response to any inquiries contained in any application for employment, license,
or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance
as a witness.
(ORC 4511.69)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 353
Parking Meters
 
353.01   Definitions.
353.02   Designation of parking spaces.
353.03   Installation of meters.
353.04   Parking rates; time limit.
353.05   Meters on High and Main Streets; rates.
353.06   Violations.
353.07   Prima-facie evidence of violations.
353.08   Tickets; proper summons and service.
353.09   Ticketing by police.
353.10   Failure to answer charges a misdemeanor.
353.11   City Manager to make rules.
353.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Off-street parking facilities - see Ohio R.C. 717.05 et seq.
Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking - see TRAF.
351.02
Tampering with meters - see GEN. OFF.
545.05
 
353.01  DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   (a)   "Parking meter" means a mechanical device installed for the regulation
of parking by lawful authority.  Each parking meter shall contain a slot for
the deposit  of lawful coin of the United States and a receptacle for receiving
and storing such coin.  Each parking meter shall display brief directions as to
its operation and the value of lawful coin required to be deposited.  Each
parking meter shall contain a timing mechanism which shall indicate either a
balance of legal parking time or overtime parking by an appropriate signal at
the expiration of such lawful time.
   (b)   "Parking meter space" means a space within a parking meter area, which
is designated for the parking of a single vehicle by marked lines on the curb
or paved surface area adjacent to a parking meter.  Posted notice on the meter
or on signs shall indicate the maximum consecutive parking time limit during
which a vehicle may be legally parked in a particular parking meter space and
the days and hours when the requirement to deposit lawful coin shall apply.
   (c)   "Holiday" or "holidays" mean the following days:
      The first day of January, known as New Year's Day;
      The third Monday in February, known as President's Day;
      The last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day;
      The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
      The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
      The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
      The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran's Day;
      The day appointed or designated by the Governor of Ohio, or the President
of the United States as a day of fast or Thanksgiving, known as Thanksgiving
Day;
      The twenty-fifth day in December, known as Christmas Day.
   Provided, however, that if any such holiday as stated above shall be the
first day of the week, known as Sunday, the next succeeding secular or business
day shall constitute the holiday.
(Ord. 81-479.  Passed 11-10-81.)
 
353.02  DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES.
   (a)   The City Manager, is hereby authorized to mark off not to exceed 1,000
individual parking spaces in the streets and avenues within the territory
bounded on the north by Buck Creek, on the east by Water Street, on the west by
Yellow Springs Street and on the south by Pleasant Street.
 
   (b)   The City Manager is further authorized to mark off not to exceed 500
individual parking spaces within the following described territories:
      (1)   The land contained within the boundaries established by Fountain
Avenue on the west, Union Street on the south, Limestone Street on the east and
the New York Central Railroad tracks on the north.
      (2)   The land contained within the triangular shaped area at the south
line of Washington Street between Spring Street and Limestone Street.
      (3)   Beginning at a point in the south line of Washington Street at the
intersection of the east line of Center Street; thence south along Center
Street to the first alley south of Washington Street; thence east along such
alley 159 feet; thence north parallel to Center Street to the south line of
Washington Street; thence west along the south line of Washington Street to the
place of beginning.
 
   (c)   Only vehicles as defined in Section
301.51 shall be parked or stored in an individual parking space established
pursuant hereto, and no vehicle or other object attempting to use such space
shall be parked, stored or placed outside of the boundaries of such individual
parking space adjacent to a parking meter.
 
   (d)   Upon the installation of such meters and the marking of such
individual parking spaces, and any parking restrictions or regulations to the
contrary notwithstanding, no person shall park or leave standing a motor
vehicle in such individual parking space for a period of time longer than
specified in Section
353.04.  A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Section
303.99.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
353.03  INSTALLATION OF METERS.
   The City Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to place and install or
cause to be placed and installed parking meters upon the curb side or in the
immediate vicinity of individual parking spaces so designated and marked as
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.04  PARKING RATES; TIME LIMIT.
   Whenever a vehicle shall be parked or stopped in an individual parking space
where a parking meter is installed pursuant to the provisions of Section
353.02 and
353.03, the person parking or stopping such vehicle shall immediately deposit
one or more coins in such meter according to the following provisions:
   (a)   Within the territory described in Section
353.02(a), a five cent (5¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle
lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed one-half hour for each five
cent (5¢) coin so deposited, or a ten cent (10¢) coin, which deposit shall
entitle such vehicle lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed one hour
for each ten cent (10¢) coin so deposited.  Provided, however, that within so
much of the territory described in Section
353.02(a) above as is on Wittenberg Avenue between Main Street and Washington
Street, on Washington Street between Wittenberg Avenue and Center Street, on
Center Street between Washington Street and Jefferson Street, on Jefferson
Street between Center Street and Fountain Avenue and on Spring Street between
Columbia Street and North Street a five cent (5¢) coin, which deposit shall
entitle such vehicle lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed two hours
for each five cent (5¢) coin so deposited, or a ten cent (10¢) coin, which
deposit shall entitle such vehicle lawfully to a occupy such space for not to
exceed four hours for each ten cent (10¢) coin so deposited, or a twenty-five
cent (25¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle lawfully to occupy
such space for not to exceed ten hours for each twenty-five cent (25¢) coin so
deposited; provided further, however, that within the territory described in
Section
353.02(a) that portion which is on Fountain Avenue between North Street and
Buck Creek, a five cent (5¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle
lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed one hour for each five cent
(5¢) coin so deposited, or a ten cent (10¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle
such vehicle lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed two hours for each
ten cent (10¢) coin so deposited; provided further, however, that the City
Manager may, by entry in the City Manager's Journal, designate not to exceed
thirty-five parking meters within the territory described in Section
353.02(a) as short term meters taking pennies so that a one cent (1¢) coin
shall entitle such vehicle lawfully to occupy such space for not to exceed
twelve minutes for each one cent (1¢) coin so deposited.
      (Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   Within the territory described in Section
353.02(b)(2), a five cent (5¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle
to lawfully occupy such space for not to exceed one-half hour for each such
coin so deposited; a ten cent (10¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such
vehicle to lawfully occupy such space for not to exceed one hour for each such
coin so deposited; or a twenty-five cent (25¢) coin, which deposit shall
entitle such vehicle to occupy such space for not to exceed two and one-half
hours for each such coin so deposited.
   (c)   Within the territory described in Section
353.02(b)(1), a five cent (5¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle
to lawfully occupy such space for not to exceed one-half hour; a ten cent (10¢)
coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle to lawfully occupy such space
for not to exceed one hour for each such coin so deposited; or a twenty-five
cent (25¢) coin, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle to occupy such space
for not to exceed two and one-half hours for each such coin so deposited. 
However, at any space provided with a meter, the supporting post of which is
painted red, the deposit of a twenty-five cent (25¢) coin shall entitle such
vehicle to lawfully occupy such space for not to exceed ten hours.  (Ord. 74-
117.  Passed 5-21-74.)
   (d)   Within the territory described in Section
353.02(b)(3), a twenty-five cent (25¢) coin, ten cent (10¢) coins, five cent
(5¢) coins or pennies, which deposit shall entitle such vehicle lawfully to
occupy such space for not to exceed ten hours for each twenty-five cent (25¢)
coin, two hours for each ten cent (10¢) coin, one hour for each five cent (5¢)
coin or twelve minutes for each penny so deposited.
   In that part of the metered territory provided for in Section
353.02(a), which is bounded on the north by Main Street, on the east by
Limestone Street, on the south by High Street and on the west by Fountain
Avenue, and that portion of Fountain Avenue which is between North Street and
Buck Creek, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a metered space for a
period longer than sixty consecutive minutes.  In that part of the metered
territory provided for in Section
353.02(a) which is on Wittenberg Avenue between Main Street and Washington
Street, on Washington Street between Wittenberg Avenue and Center Street, on
Center Street between Washington Street and Jefferson Street, on Jefferson
Street between Center Street and Fountain Avenue, and on Spring Street between
Columbia Street and North Street, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a
metered space for a period longer than ten consecutive hours.  At those meters
in that part of the metered territory provided for in Section
353.02(a) which are designated by the City Manager as short term meters, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a metered space for a period longer than
twenty-four consecutive minutes.  In the remaining metered territory provided
for in Section
353.02(a), no vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a metered space for a
period longer than 120 consecutive minutes.
   Coins deposited in parking meters as herein required shall consist only of
United States money.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.05  METERS ON HIGH AND MAIN STREETS; RATES.
   (a)   The City Manager, is authorized to install and maintain parking meters
in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   Two-hour parking meters on High Street from Spring Street to Linden
Avenue;
      (2)   Two-hour parking meters on East Main Street from Spring Street to
North Foster Street;
      (3)   Two-hour parking meters on West Main Street from Wittenberg Avenue
to Yellow Springs Street;
      (4)   Two-hour parking meters on West High Street from Wittenberg Avenue
to Lowry Avenue.
 
   (b)   Upon the installation of such meters, no person shall park or let
stand any vehicle within any area described in subsection (a) hereof, without
first depositing a five cent (5¢) coin for one hour, or a ten cent (10¢) coin
for two hours in the appropriate meter, and no person shall park or let stand
any vehicle in any one space within such area for a period of time longer than
two consecutive hours.
(Ord. 75-82.  Passed 3-18-75.)
 
353.06  VIOLATIONS.
   Any vehicle which is parked or stopped in an individual parking space
without a deposit of the coin or coins hereinbefore specified, or which remains
parked or stopped in any individual parking space after the time following the
above required deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, during which the same
may lawfully occupy such space as hereinbefore set forth, shall be held to be
illegally parked, and the person so parking or stopping the same is hereby
determined to have violated this chapter.
   Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any vehicle
occupying such an individual parking space between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. following, or on Sundays or holidays in that part of the metered
territory described in Section
353.02(b)(1) and (b)(3); and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
following, or on Sundays or holidays in that part of the metered territory
described in Section
353.02(b)(2); and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. following, or
Sundays or holidays in the remaining portion of the metered territory provided
for in Section
353.02, unless a different provision of the Traffic Code or a rule, regulation
or direction promulgated in accordance with such code provides otherwise.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.07  PRIMA-FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATIONS.
   All parking is prohibited in any individual parking space where a parking
meter is installed unless a deposit is made as herein provided.  Any vehicle
parked in contravention of this provision shall be deemed to be unlawfully
parked under the provisions of this chapter.  The fact that a vehicle is in an
individual parking space when the time signal on the parking meter for the same
shows no parking permitted unless a deposit as aforesaid is immediately made,
as herein provided, shall be deemed prima-facie evidence of the unlawful
parking of such vehicle by its owner.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.08  TICKETS; PROPER SUMMONS AND SERVICE.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to provide police
officers with tickets which shall be used for the purpose of giving due notice
to owners, chauffeurs and drivers of vehicles in violation of this chapter. 
Any owner, chauffeur, or driver when a ticket as herein provided is attached to
the vehicle which he has left parked in the streets of the City contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, shall appear at the place designated upon such
ticket, and according to the directions thereon, shall comply with the
instructions and directions appearing upon such ticket, pursuant to such
violation.  It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to do so.  Such ticket
citation as herein provided, when attached to a vehicle in a conspicuous place,
shall be a legal and sufficient summons, and legal and sufficient service
thereof upon the owner, for the purposes specified thereon, provided, however,
that this section shall not abridge the power of the police officers to arrest
for crimes and misdemeanors.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.09  TICKETING BY POLICE.
   Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the parking
restrictions of this chapter, the police officer finding it shall take its
registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its owner, and affix conspicuously to such vehicle a notice in
writing, on a form provided for such use, or hand the same to the operator of
such vehicle, for the owner or operator to answer the charge against him within
two days during hours and at a place specified in the notice.  The Police
Officer shall send one copy of such notice to the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.10  FAILURE TO ANSWER CHARGES A MISDEMEANOR.
   Any owner or operator of a vehicle who willfully neglects to answer to the
charges set forth on a notice fixed by the police officer to such vehicle in
accordance with this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the
disposition of the charge for which the notice was originally issued.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.11  CITY MANAGER TO MAKE RULES.
   The City Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to make, modify, change
from time to time and promulgate such administrative rules as in his discretion
shall be deemed to effectuate the provisions of this chapter.  The powers
conveyed by this section shall be in addition to any and all other powers which
are now, or may hereafter be conferred upon the City Manager, and the powers
hereby conferred shall be deemed in no sense a limitation or a restriction of
any powers of the City Manager.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
353.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
303.99 for misdemeanor classifications and penalties.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 355
Taxicab Stands
 
355.01   City Manager to establish taxicab stands.
355.02   Taxicabs in stands.
355.03   Entering line in stand.
355.04   Monopoly by one cab owner prohibited.
355.05   Authority of City Manager.
355.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to establish stands - see Ohio R.C. 715.25(A)
Taxicabs - see BUS. REG. Ch.
765
 
355.01  CITY MANAGER TO ESTABLISH TAXICAB STANDS.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish upon such
streets as in his opinion will serve the best interest of the public, taxicab
stands, where it shall be lawful to permit taxicabs to park for a period not
exceeding one hour while awaiting passengers for hire; provided, however, not
more than two taxicabs shall park on each side of any street in any square
outside of the taxi stands.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
355.02  TAXICABS IN STANDS.
   Any taxicab stand so established shall be subject to the regulation that
only taxicabs in such numbers as set forth on the approved police sign shall
remain at any taxicab stand while awaiting for passengers, and only in single
file, headed in accordance with the traffic regulations.  No taxicab standing
at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry any orderly person applying
for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper rate of fare, but this regulation
shall not prevent any person from selecting any taxicab he may desire on such
stand, whether it be at the head of the line or not.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
355.03  ENTERING LINE IN STAND.
   As taxicabs leave the line with passengers, those behind shall move up, and
any taxicab seeking a place on the stand shall approach it only from the rear,
and shall stop as near as possible to the last taxicab already within the
stand.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed  1-9-67.)
355.04  MONOPOLY BY ONE CAB OWNER PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise directed by the City Manager, not more than one cab of
one owner shall at one time occupy any stand having a capacity of three
vehicles or less; not more than two cabs of one owner shall at one time occupy
any stand of greater capacity than three vehicles.  Should more than the legal
number of taxicabs belonging to one owner occupy a given stand at one time, the
last cab or cabs belonging to the owner in the line shall be deemed the
violator or violators.
(Ord 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
355.05  AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   The authority herein conferred upon the City Manager to establish taxicab
stands shall be a continuing one, and he may establish or abolish such stands,
or change the number of vehicles which shall be permitted within such stands as
in his opinion will best serve the interest of the public.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
355.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
303.99 for misdemeanor classifications and penalties.)
CHAPTER 357
Junk Vehicles
 
357.01   Definition; notice to cover.
357.02   Towing of junk vehicles from private property.
357.03   Towing of junk vehicles from public roadways.
357.04   Abandoned junk motor vehicles.
357.05   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles.
357.06   Willfully abandoned junk vehicles prohibited.
357.07   Abandoned, wrecked, non-operating or discarded vehicles.
357.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Junk vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 4513.60 et seq.
 
357.01  DEFINITION; NOTICE TO COVER.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "junk motor vehicle" means any motor
vehicle meeting the requirements of Section
357.04(b) to (e), that is left uncovered in the open on private property for
more than seventy-two hours with the permission of the person having the right
to the possession of the property, except if the person is operating a junkyard
or scrap metal processing facility licensed under authority of Chapter
739 of the Codified Ordinances; or if the property on which the motor vehicle
is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental
authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of the property
can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial
operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector's vehicle.
 
   (b)   The Chief of Police, or the Director of Development or their
authorized representatives may send notice, by certified mail with return
receipt requested, to the person having the right to the possession of the
property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt
of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed
in a garage or other suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
 
   (c)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in the
open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section.  The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of
thirty days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a
separate offense.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
357.02  TOWING OF JUNK VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Chief of Police, within his territorial jurisdiction, upon
complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in Section
357.04, which has been left on private property for more than seventy-two hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property.  The Chief, upon complaint of the owner of a repair garage or place
of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle other than an abandoned
junk motor vehicle which has been left at the garage or place of storage for a
longer period than that agreed upon.  The place of storage shall be designated
by the Chief.
 
   (b)   The owner of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon payment of any
expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of
proof of ownership, which may be evidence by a certificate of title to the
motor vehicle.  If the motor vehicle remains unclaimed by the owner for thirty
days, the procedures established by Sections
357.03 and
357.05 shall apply.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
 
357.03  TOWING OF JUNK VEHICLES FROM PUBLIC ROADWAYS.
   (a)   The Chief of Police, within his territorial jurisdiction, may order
into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in Section
357.04, which has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for forty-eight hours or longer without notification to
the Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place.  The
Chief shall designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle ordered removed
by him.
 
   (b)   The Chief shall immediately cause a search to be made of the records
of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the owner and any lienholder of a
motor vehicle ordered into storage by the Chief, and, if known, shall send
notice to the owner or lienholder at his last known address by certified mail
with return receipt requested, that the motor vehicle shall be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing
of the notice.  The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim it
upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
presentation of proof of ownership which may be evidence by a certificate of
title to the motor vehicle.
 
   (c)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in Section
357.05, the Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the County in which
the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section.  If the vehicle is to be disposed of to a
junkyard or other facility as provided in Section
357.05, the Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in
which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been
complied with.  The Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for his
records, and shall furnish two copies to the owner of the junkyard or other
facility.
 
   (d)   As provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.62, upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the owner of the junkyard or other facility, the Clerk of Courts
shall issue to such owner a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens
and encumbrances.
 
   (e)   Also under Ohio R.C. 4513.62, whenever the owner of a junkyard or
other facility receives an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as
provided in this section, such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio
certificate of title to the motor vehicle in his own name if, within ten days
of the receipt of the affidavit, the vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and
both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the Clerk of Courts.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
 
357.04  ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   "Abandoned junk motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle meeting all of the
following requirements:
   (a)   Left on private property for more than seventy-two hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, on
a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway,
for forty-eight hours or longer;
   (b)   Three years old, or older;
   (c)   Extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of
the following:  a broken window or windshield, missing wheels, tires, motor or
transmission;
   (d)   Apparently inoperable;
   (e)   Having a fair market value of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) or
less.
   The Chief of Police, within his territorial jurisidiction, shall order any
abandoned junk motor vehicle to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. 
The officer shall record the make of motor vehicle, the serial number when
available, and shall also detail the damage or missing equipment to
substantiate the value provided in (e) hereof.  The Chief shall thereupon
immediately dispose of the abandoned junk motor vehicle to a  junkyard or scrap
metal processing facility as defined in Chapter
739 of the Codified Ordinances, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the City for disposal of such motor vehicles.  The records and
photograph relating to the abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be retained by
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposition of such vehicle for a
period of at least two years.  The law enforcement agency shall execute in
quadruplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles,
describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and
that all requirements of this section have been complied with, and shall sign
and file the same with the Clerk of Courts of the County in which the motor
vehicle was abandoned.  The Clerk of Courts shall retain the original of the
affidavit for his files, shall furnish one copy thereof the registrar, one copy
to the junkyard or other facility handling the disposal of the vehicle, and one
copy to the law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file such
copy with the records and photograph relating to the disposal.  Any moneys
arising from the disposal of an abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be deposited
in the General Fund.
(Ord. 95-31.  Passed 1-31-95.)
   Notwithstanding Section
357.03, any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of subsections (c), (d) and
(e) hereof which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a period
of ten days or longer following notification as provided in Section
357.03 may be disposed of as provided in this section.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
 
357.05  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to Sections
357.02 and
357.03 shall be disposed of at the order of the Chief of Police to a junkyard
or scrap metal processing facility or to any other facility owned or under
contract with the City for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or shall be
sold by the Chief, or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after giving
notice thereof by advertisement, published once a week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the County.  Any moneys accruing from
the disposition of an unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the
expenses resulting from the removal and storage of the vehicle shall be
credited to the General Fund.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
 
357.06  WILLFULLY ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined
in Section
357.04 on private property for more than seventy-two hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, or
on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right of way of any road or
highway, for forty-eight hours or longer without notification to the Sheriff of
the County or the Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle
in such place.
   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle has been so left
without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of abandonment.
(Ord. 98-1974.  Passed 12-9-74.)
357.07  ABANDONED, WRECKED, NONOPERATING OR DISCARDED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions.  The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this section:
      (1)   "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      (2)   "Vehicle" means any contrivance propelled by power other than human
power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles,
tractors, buggies and wagons.
      (3)   "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of travel.
 
   (b)   Abandonment of Vehicles.  No person shall abandon any vehicle within
the City and no person shall leave any vehicle any place within the City for a
period exceeding forty-eight hours.
   (c)   Storage Prohibited; Exceptions.  No person in charge or control of any
property within the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle with a fair market value exceeding the value provided in Section
357.04 to remain on such property longer than forty-eight hours, and no person
shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the City for a longer time
than forty-eight hours.  However, this section shall not apply with regard to a
vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the
operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage
place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the City.
(Ord. 95-31.  Passed 1-31-95.)
 
   (d)   Impounding.  The City Manager or his authorized designee is hereby
authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle at or upon any place or
property within the City which appears to be in violation of this section, or
is lost, stolen or unclaimed.  Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with City ordinances.
 
357.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the County
or City in disposing of an abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money
accruing to the County or to the City from such disposal.
 
 
 
TITLE NINE - Pedestrians, Bicycles and Motorcycles
Chap.
371. Pedestrians.
Chap.
373. Bicycles, Motorcycles and Skateboards.
Chap.
375. Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All Purpose Vehicles.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 371
Pedestrians
 
371.01   Right of way in crosswalk.
371.02   Right of way of blind person.
371.03   Crossing roadway outside crosswalk; diagonal crossings at
intersections.
371.04   Moving upon right half of crosswalk.
371.05   Walking along highways.
371.06   Use of highway for soliciting; riding on outside of vehicles.
371.07   Right of way on sidewalk.
371.08   Yielding to public safety vehicle.
371.09   Walking on highway while under the influence.
371.10   On bridges or railroad crossings.
371.11   Throwing articles prohibited.
371.12   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs.
371.13   Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Pedestrian defined - see TRAF.
301.22
Pedestrian prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
303.06
Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
313.01,
313.03
Pedestrian control signals - see TRAF.
313.05
 
371.01  RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALK.
   (a)   When traffic control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right of way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield or if required by
Section
313.09, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Subsection (a) hereof does not apply under the conditions stated in
Section
371.03(b).
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.46)
371.02  RIGHT OF WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   As used in this section "blind person" or "blind pedestrian" means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation in
the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends
an angle no greater than twenty degrees.
   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right of way to every blind
pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is predominately
white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry a white metallic cane,
with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.47)
371.03  CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE CROSSWALK; DIAGONAL CROSSINGS AT
INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.48)
371.04  MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.49)
371.05  WALKING ALONG HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, no pedestrian
shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in Section
313.03 and
371.01, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles upon the roadway. 
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.50)
371.06  USE OF HIGHWAY FOR SOLICITING; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, no person shall
stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit to a
charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the organization
to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle by standing
on a highway, other than a freeway, as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.051(A), that
is under the jurisdiction of the Municipality.  The permit shall be valid for
only one period or time, which shall be specified in the permit, in any
calendar year.  Council also may specify the locations where contributions may
be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or requirements regarding
the manner in which the solicitations are to be conducted that Council
considers advisable.
      (3)   As used herein, "charitable organization" means an organization
that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or
determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the "Internal Revenue Code."
   (c)   No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or ride on
the outside of, any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of sixteen years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the
vehicle is traveling faster than twenty-five miles per hour, unless either of
the following applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt;
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency to ride in the cargo storage
area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is unlatched. 
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.51)
371.07  RIGHT OF WAY ON SIDEWALK.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.441)
371.08  YIELDING TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle as stated in
Section
331.21, every pedestrian shall yield the right of way to the public safety
vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian. 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.452)
371.09  WALKING ON HIGHWAY WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.481)
371.10  ON BRIDGES OR RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.511)
371.11  THROWING ARTICLES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall throw or threaten to throw any article into or against
any vehicle or passenger or driver thereof.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
371.12  PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   (a)   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the
rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this Traffic
Code, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
371.13  ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than five hundred feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of fifty-five miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under eighteen years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under sixteen years of age, operate the device unless, during
the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is eighteen years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under sixteen years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under fourteen years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT - HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.  (ORC 4511.512)
   (e)   “Electric personal assistive mobility device” means a self-balancing
two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person,
has an electric propulsion system of an average of seven hundred fifty watts,
and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs one hundred
seventy pounds has a maximum speed of less than twenty miles per hour.  (ORC
4501.01)
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (b) or (c) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00).
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (B) or (C) of Ohio R.C. 4511.512 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing the fine
required under subsection (f)(1) hereof, shall do one of the following:
         A.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more than
thirty days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that section.  The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than five dollars ($5.00) per day, provided
the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender
or the device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release
shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
         B.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
subsection (f)(2)A.  hereof, issue an order prohibiting the offender from
operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than
thirty days.
   (g)   Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
CHAPTER 373
Bicycles, Motorcycles and Skateboards
 
373.01   Code application to bicycles.
373.02   Riding upon seats; handle bars; helmets and glasses.
373.03   Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle.
373.04   Riding bicycles and motorcycles abreast.
373.05   Riding bicycles on sidewalks; signaling overtaken pedestrians.
373.06   Lights and reflector on bicycle; brakes.
373.07   Riding bicycle on right side of roadway; obedience to traffic rules;
passing.
373.08   Reckless operation; control, course and speed.
373.09   Emerging from alley or driveway.
373.10   Parking bicycles.
373.11   Bicycle dealers
373.12   Rental agencies.
373.13   Motorized bicycle operation, equipment and license.
373.14   Skateboards.
373.15   Paths exclusively for bicycles.
373.16   Electric bicycles.
373.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Motorcycle protective equipment - see OAC Ch. 4501-17
Motorized bicycle equipment - see OAC Ch. 4501-23
Bicycle defined - see TRAF.
301.04
Motorcycle defined - see TRAF.
301.19
Bicycles prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
303.06
Motorcycle operator's license required - see TRAF.
335.01(a)
Motorcycle headlight - see TRAF.
337.03
Motorcycle brakes - see TRAF.
337.18(b)
 
373.01  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to bicycles
and electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated
upon any street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a bicycle
operator or electric bicycle operator who violates any section of this Traffic
Code described in subsection (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles
or electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation.  A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any section of this Traffic Code described in subsection (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of this
Traffic Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by the Traffic Code for that violation.
   (d)   Subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
Section
 333.01 of this Traffic Code.  (ORC 4511.52)
   (e)   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to bicycles and
electric bicycles except those which by their nature are not applicable.
 
373.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; HANDLE BARS; HELMETS AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section "snowmobile" has the same meaning as
given that term in Ohio R.C 4519.01.
   (b)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride other
than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, or carry
any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a firmly
attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle or
electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat.
   (c)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or astride
the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any other
person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than upon
such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
   (d)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a saddle
other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one leg on
each side of the motorcycle.
   (e)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
   (f)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
   (g)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.  No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars
rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in
the operator’s seat or saddle.
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (h)(2) of this section, no
person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without
using safety glasses or other protective eye device.  Except as provided in
subsection (i)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of eighteen
years, or who holds a motorcycle operator's endorsement or license bearing
"novice" designation that is currently in effect as provided in Ohio R.C.
4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a
motorcycle, unless wearing a United States Department of Transportation-
approved protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be a
passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a
protective helmet.  The helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.  The
provisions of this subsection or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action. 
      (2)   Subsection (h)(1) of this section does not apply to a person
operating an autocycle or cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment
top is in place enclosing the occupants.
   (i)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Ohio
Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless the person, at
the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet
that has been approved by the United States Department of Transportation that
conforms with rules adopted by the Director.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   At any time when lighted lights are required by Section
337.02(a)(1);
         B.   While carrying a passenger;
         C.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
   (j)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle. (ORC 4511.53)
   (k)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
 
373.03  ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, electric bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to
any vehicle upon a roadway.
   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any motorcycle,
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to
attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.  This
section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle. (ORC 4511.54)
   (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
 
373.04  RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (a)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
(ORC 4511.55)
   (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
 
373.05  RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS; SIGNALING OVERTAKEN PEDESTRIANS.
   (a)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (b)   No person twelve years of age or older shall ride a bicycle upon any
sidewalk in any district of the City.
   (c)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing any pedestrian.  (Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
373.06  LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; BRAKES.
   (a)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in Section
337.02, shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least five hundred feet to the front; and three hundred feet to the
sides.  A generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or
electric bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet to the rear when directly
in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector;
         If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under subsection (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
(ORC 4511.56)
373.07  RIDING BICYCLE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES;
PASSING.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
   (b)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so.  Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. (ORC
4511.55(A))
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under Section
303.991 of the Traffic Code.
373.08  RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle or electric bicycle:   
   (a)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (b)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle;
   (c)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;
   (d)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give
the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in Section
373.02(d);
   (e)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
 
373.09  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
shall yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
373.10  PARKING BICYCLES.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk other than in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
373.11  BICYCLE DEALERS.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand
bicycles shall make a report once each week to the Chief of Police of every
bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the
person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by
name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of license plate, if any
is attached thereto.  Each bicycle purchased shall be retained by the purchaser
for at least seven days before disposing of the same.
(Ord. 67-14.  Passed 1-9-67.)
 
373.12  RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless such
bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by this
Chapter.
(Ord. 82-346.  Passed 7-20-82.)
 
373.13  MOTORIZED BICYCLE OPERATION, EQUIPMENT AND LICENSE.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any street or highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person possesses a valid license or permit authorizing such
operation and which is issued by the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or 4507 or Ohio R.C. 4511.521;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with rules adopted
by the Ohio Director of Public Safety and is in proper working order;
      (3)   The person, if he is under eighteen years of age, is wearing a
protective helmet on his head with the chin strap properly fastened, and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rear-view mirror;
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles; and
      (5)   The motorized bicycle displays on the rear of such bicycle the
current license plate or validation sticker furnished by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4503.191. 
 
   (b)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
 
   (c)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle
license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.
(ORC 4511.521)
 
373.14  SKATEBOARDS.
   (a)   No person shall ride a skateboard on any sidewalk, street, alley or
public ground in the Central Business District.
 
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, the Central Business District of the
City is as follows:
Beginning at a point of the intersection of the west right-of-way line of South
Fountain Avenue and the north right-of-way line of East Main Street; thence in
an eastwardly direction along the north right-of-way line of East Main Street
to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of South Limestone Street;
thence in a southerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South
Limestone Street to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of East
Washington Street; thence in a westwardly direction along the south right-of-
way line of East Washington Street to its intersection with the west right-of-
way line of South Fountain Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the
west right-of-way line of South Fountain Avenue to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 88-393.  Passed 6-28-88.)
 
373.15  PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-purpose vehicle
upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when an appropriate
sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of the Ohio
Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under his
jurisdiction.  (ORC 4511.713)
 
373.16  ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the Municipality by resolution,
ordinance, or rule prohibits the use of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the Municipality by resolution,
ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a class 3 electric bicycle on such a
path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to be
used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for nonmotorized use, unless the Municipality by resolution,
ordinance or rule authorizes the use of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
   (b)   (1)   No person under sixteen years of age shall operate a class 3
electric bicycle; however, a person under sixteen years of age may ride as a
passenger on a class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate
passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (c)   The offenses established under subsection (a) and (b) of this section
are strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20.  The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(ORC 4511.522)
 
373.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 375
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All Purpose Vehicles
 
375.01   Definitions.
375.02   Equipment.
375.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
375.04   Permitted operation.
375.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
375.06   Registration of vehicles.
375.07   Accident reports.
375.08   Certificate of title.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Lights, brakes and muffler - see OAC Ch. 4501.29
Power of trial court of record to impound registration certificate for certain
violations - see Ohio R.C 4519.47
Power to regulate; municipal licensing prohibited - see Ohio R.C. 4519.48
Street or highway defined - see TRAF.
301.42
Required usage of helmets and safety glasses - see TRAF.
373.02(f)
 
375.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Snowmobile" means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
use on snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.  (ORC
4519.01(A))
   (b)   "All purpose vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle designed
primarily for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type
of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail
bikes.  “All-purpose vehicle” does not include a utility vehicle as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor
vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503 or
Chapter 4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by
Section
301.20 of this Traffic Code.  (ORC 4519.01(B))
   (c)   "Owner" means any person, firm or corporation, other than a lienholder
or dealer, having title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose
vehicle, or other right to the possession thereof.  (ORC 4519.01(C))
   (d)   "Operator" means any person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all purpose vehicle.
   (e)   "Limited access highway" or "freeway" means a highway especially
designed for through traffic and over which abutting property owners have no
easement or right of access by reason of the fact that their property abuts
upon such highway, and access to which may be allowed only at highway
intersections designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation.  (ORC 5511.02)
   (f)   "Interstate highway" means any part of the interstate system of
highways as defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C.A. 103,
and amendments thereof.
   (g)   “Off-highway motorcycle” means every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a
street or highway.  (ORC 4519.01)
375.02  EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose
vehicles shall include, but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red taillight having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Adequate brakes.  Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow,
shall be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while
carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in not more than forty feet from
an initial steady speed of twenty miles per hour, or locking its traction belt.
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles.  On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed eighty-two decibels
on the "A" scale at fifty feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September
1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in subsections (a)(1) and (2) hereof shall not be required on snowmobiles, off-
highway motorcycles, or all purpose vehicles operated during the daylight
hours. 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00).  If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of subsection (b) of this section, whoever violates subsection (b) of
this section shall be fined not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not more than three days, or
both.
(ORC 4519.20)
375.03  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code shall be applied to the
operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles;
except that no snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle shall
be operated as follows:
      (1)   On any street or highway except for emergency travel only during
such time and in such manner as the State or local authority having
jurisdiction over such street or highway shall designate, and except as
provided in Section
375.04;
      (2)   Upon any property owned or leased by the Municipality except in
areas designated for such purposes;
      (3)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (4)   On any land or waters controlled by the State, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (5)   On tracks or right of way of any operating railroad;
      (6)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting,
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (7)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl;
      (8)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by Section
375.02. 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned not
less than three nor more than thirty days, or both.  (ORC 4519.40)
375.04  PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a freeway or limited
access highway, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not
interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction
on the highway, and provided that the operator yields the right of way to any
approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the County or Township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highway so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside a street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated. 
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A), when the terrain permits such operation to
be undertaken safely and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder of a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.  (ORC 4519.41)
375.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver's or
commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or probationary
license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or 4507, or a valid, current
driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any street or highway, on any
portion of the right of way thereof, or on any public land or waters.  This
subsection shall not be construed to permit the holder of such a license to
operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle in
violation of Section
375.03.
   (b)   No person who is less than sixteen years of age shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to such
person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is
eighteen years of age, or older, and who holds a license as provided in
subsection (a) hereof, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may
permit such operation on State controlled land under its jurisdiction when such
person is less than sixteen years of age and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver eighteen years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned not
less than three nor more than thirty days, or both.  (ORC 4519.44)
375.06  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C 4519.02(B), (C) and (D), no person
shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle
unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is
registered and numbered in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4519.03 and 4519.04. 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00).  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of subsection (a) of this section, whoever violates subsection
(a) of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).  (ORC 4519.02)
375.07  ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall report the accident within forty-eight hours to the Chief of
Police, and, within thirty days, shall forward a written report of the accident
to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. 
If the operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is
another participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall
make the reports.  In the event that there is no other participant, and the
operator is other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of
time, shall make the reports.
   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C. 4519.42
and 4519.43, who investigates or receives information of an accident involving
a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle shall forward to
the Registrar a written report of the accident within forty-eight hours.  (ORC
4519.46)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
375.08  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, if such a certificate is required by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it,
operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the
ownership information relating to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of
common pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of the court
of common pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the
destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 or any lawful
rules adopted pursuant to those sections;
      (6)   Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the
motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing
system has been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(ORC 4519.66)
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART FIVE - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
Chap.
501.  General Provisions and Penalty.
Chap.
505.  Animals and Fowl.
Chap.
509.  Disorderly Conduct and Peace Disturbance.
Chap.
511.  Juvenile Curfew.
Chap.
513.  Drug Abuse Control.
Chap.
517.  Gambling.
Chap.
521.  Health, Safety and Sanitation.
Chap.
523.  Smoking Prohibitions.
Chap.
525.  Law Enforcement and Public Office.
Chap.
529.  Liquor Control.
Chap.
533.  Obscenity and Sex Offenses.
Chap.
537.  Offenses Against Persons.
Chap.
541.  Property Offenses.
Chap.
543.  Registration of Felons.
Chap.
545.  Theft and Fraud.
Chap.
549.  Weapons and Explosives.
Chap.
553.  Railroads.
Chap.
557.  Park Rules and Regulations.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 501
General Provisions and Penalty
 
501.01   Definitions.
501.02   Classification of offenses.
501.03   Common law offenses abrogated.
501.04   Rules of construction.
501.05   Criminal law jurisdiction.
501.06   Limitation of criminal prosecution.
501.07   Requirements for criminal liability.
501.08   Culpable mental states.
501.09   Attempt.
501.10   Complicity.
501.11   Organizational criminal liability.
501.12   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
501.13   Conspiracy.
501.99   Penalties for misdemeanors.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Limitation of prosecution for income tax violations - see Ohio R.C. 718.06
Modification of sentence - see Ohio R.C. 2929.10(C), (D)
Penalty considerations - see Ohio R.C. 2929.22
Citation issuance for minor misdemeanors - see Ohio R.C. 2935.26 et seq.
 
501.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances:
   (a)   "Force" means any violence, compulsion or constraint physically
exerted by any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (b)   "Deadly force" means any force that carries a substantial risk that it
will proximately result in the death of any person.
   (c)   "Physical harm to persons" means any injury, illness or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (d)   "Physical harm to property" means any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment.  "Physical harm to property" does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
   (e)   "Serious physical harm to persons" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (f)   "Serious physical harm to property" means any physical harm to
property that does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use and enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (g)   "Risk" means a significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (h)   "Substantial risk" means a strong possibility, as contrasted with a
remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that
certain circumstances may exist.
   (i)   "Offense of violence" means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, 2923.161, 2903.04(A)(1), 2911.12(A)(1) to
(3) or 2919.22(B)(1) to (4), or felonious sexual penetration in violation of
former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States, substantially equivalent to any
section listed in subsection (i)(1) hereof;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United
States, committed, purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under subsection (i)(1), (2) or (3) hereof.
   (j)   (1)   "Property" means any property, real or personal, tangible or
intangible, and any interest or license in that property.  "Property" includes,
but is not limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications
service, telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data,
computer software, financial instruments associated with computers, other
documents associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in
machine or human readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents,
and property protected by a trademark, copyright, or patent.  “Financial
instruments associated with computers” include, but are not limited to, checks,
drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit,
letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction
authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system
representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this section, “trade secret” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this section, “cable television service”, “computer”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “computer network”, “data”, and
“telecommunications device” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (k)   "Law enforcement officer" means any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or State highway patrol trooper;
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the State or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, Charter or
ordinance, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits
of that statutory duty and authority;
      (3)   A mayor or manager in the mayor’s or manager’s capacity as chief
conservator of the peace within the mayor’s or manager’s municipal corporation;
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by county, township
or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the member's
appointment or commission;
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called;
      (6)   A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.01 as a
special patrolling officer during riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed;
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this State or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor;
      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02;
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y);
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28;
      (12)   The Senate Sergeant of Arms and or Assistant Sergeant at Arms;
      (13)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in Section 119.3 of Title 14 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is required to be
under a security program and is governed by aviation security rules of the
transportation security administration of the United States Department of
Transportation as provided in Parts 1542 and 1544 of Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as amended.
   (l)   "Privilege" means an immunity, license or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (m)   "Contraband" means any property that is illegal for a person to
acquire or possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact
lawfully determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s
involvement in an offense.  “Contraband” includes, but is not limited to, all
of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio  R.C.  3719.01, or any
device, or paraphernalia;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device, or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (n)   A person is “not guilty by reason of insanity” relative to a charge of
an offense only if the person proves, in the manner specified in Ohio R.C.
2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the offense, the person did not
know, as a result of a severe mental disease or defect, the wrongfulness of the
person’s acts.
   (o)   (1)   A.   Subject to subsection (o)(2) hereof, as used in any section
contained in
Part Five - General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense, “person”
includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association;
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in
Part Five - General Offenses Code that does not set forth a criminal offense,
“person” includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
         C.   As used in subsection (o)(1)A. hereof:
            1.   “Unborn human” means an individual organism of the species
Homo sapiens from fertilization until live birth.
            2.   “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic possibility of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (o)(1)A. hereof, in no case shall the
portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in subsection
(o)(1)A.2. hereof be applied or construed in any section contained in Part Five
- General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the
following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (o)(2)A. hereof, in a
manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman.  An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21, or
2903.22, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence, but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2919.13, or Ohio R.C. 2919.151,
2919.17 or 2919.18, may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.12,
division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2919.13, or Ohio R.C. 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18,
as applicable.  Consent is sufficient under this subsection if it is of the
type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman, even
if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness or other physiological impairment,
regardless of its duration or gravity, or a mental illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
   (p)   “School safety zone” consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
   (q)   “School”, “school building” and “school premises” have the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (r)   “School activity” means any activity held under the auspices of a
board of education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or
cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community
school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing body of an
educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C.
3301.07.
   (s)   “School bus” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.  (ORC
2901.01)
      (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
501.02  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service under division
(D) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, or a financial sanction other than a fine under Ohio
R.C. 2929.28.
         (ORC 2901.02)
 
501.03  COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the Municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in the Codified Ordinances or any other
Municipal ordinance.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of the Codified
Ordinances state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide
a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
501.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) hereof, sections of the
Codified Ordinances defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed
against the Municipality and liberally construed in favor of the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of the Ohio Revised Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a
previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of the
Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code or of a division of a section of the
Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also refer to a
previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially equivalent offense
under an existing or former law of this State, another state, or the United
States or under an existing or former municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a section, or
to a division of a section, of the Codified Ordinances that defines or
specifies a criminal offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or
former law of this State, another state, or the United States, to an existing
or former municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such
existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined
or specified, a substantially equivalent offense.  (ORC 2901.04)
501.05  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)    A person is subject to misdemeanor prosecution and punishment in this
Municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this Municipality,
any element of which takes place in this Municipality.
      (2)   While in this Municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this
State and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this Municipality, the person
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an
offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this State and the other
jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is
undertaken in this Municipality by the person or another person involved in the
conspiracy, subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy.  In any
case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the
commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as
described in this subsection, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this Municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and
for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other
jurisdiction.
      (3)   While out of this Municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
Municipality.
      (4)   While out of this Municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this Municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the Municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this Municipality.
      (5)   While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this Municipality.
      (6)   While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another and subsequently brings the other person into this
Municipality.
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image, or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
Municipality in violation of the law of this Municipality.
 
   (b)   This Municipality includes the land and water within its boundaries
and the air space above such land and water, and real property outside the
corporate limits, with respect to which this Municipality has either exclusive
or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.  Where the boundary between this
Municipality and another jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is
conclusively presumed to be within this Municipality for purposes of this
section.
   (c)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this Municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this Municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
Municipality for purposes of this section.
   (d)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this Municipality for an offense committed or completed outside of this
Municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this Municipality.
   (e)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (f)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this Municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this Municipality.
   (g)   For purposes of subsection (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (h)   As used in this section, “computer”, “computer system”, “computer
network”, “information service”, “telecommunication”, “telecommunications
device”, “telecommunications service”, “data”, and “writing” have the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01. (ORC 2901.11)
501.06  LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be
barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is
committed:
      (1)   For misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
      (2)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
 
   (b)   If the period of limitation provided in subsection (a) hereof has
expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is
fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one year after discovery of the
offense either by an aggrieved person, or by his legal representative who is
not himself a party to the offense.
 
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in this section has
expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the following offenses during the
following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a  public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this subsection:
         A.   An “offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a
public servant” includes, but is not limited to, a violation of Ohio R.C.
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, division (F) or (H) of Ohio R.C. 102.03,
division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2921.02, division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 2921.43, or
division (F) or (G) of Ohio R.C. 3517.13, that is directly related to an
offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant.
         B.   “Public servant” has the same meaning as in Section
525.01.
 
   (d)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs.  In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
 
   (e)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same.  A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process, unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
 
   (f)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
 
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused absented himself
from this Municipality or concealed his identity or whereabouts is prima-facie
evidence of his purpose to avoid prosecution.
 
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this State, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
 
   (i)   The period of limitation for a violation of any provision of this
General Offenses Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under eighteen years of age or of a child with a developmental
disability or physical impairment under twenty-one years of age shall not begin
to run until either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.  (ORC 2901.13)
 
   (j)   This section shall not apply to prosecutions commenced within the
period of limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. 718.12(B) for violations of the
Municipal income tax ordinance.
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
501.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a person is not guilty of
an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
 
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one subsection
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that subsection does not by itself plainly indicate a
purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other
subsections of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses
defined in the Traffic Code.
      (3)   Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution
of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
      (2)   Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness or
sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor's
volition, are involuntary acts.
      (3)   "Culpability" means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence,
as defined in Section
501.08.
      (4)   “Intoxication” includes, but is not limited to, intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug. 
(ORC 2901.21)
501.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
 
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature.  A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. 
   When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an
offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes that
there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts
with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact.
 
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and unjustifiable
risk that the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely
to be of a certain nature.  A person is reckless with respect to circumstances
when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are
likely to exist.
 
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.  A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
 
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element. 
(ORC 2901.22)
 
501.09  ATTEMPT.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
 
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
 
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense or of
complicity in the commission of an offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to
commit the same offense in violation of this section.
 
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned the actor’s effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of the actor’s criminal purpose.
 
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense.  An attempt to commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is
determined by the amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance
involved in the drug abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug
abuse offense attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed
and had involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance
that is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was
involved in the attempt.  An attempt to commit any other misdemeanor is a
misdemeanor of the next lesser degree than the misdemeanor attempted.  In the
case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor
of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony under the Ohio Revised
Code, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a
misdemeanor.  An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor is not an offense under
this section. 
 
   (f)   As used in this section, “drug abuse offense” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.  (ORC 2923.02)
 
501.10  COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
 
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
 
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Section
501.09.
 
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense or an offense, the court when it charges the jury, shall state
substantially the following:
 
   "The testimony of an accomplice does not become inadmissible because of his
complicity, moral turpitude or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed
complicity of a witness may affect his credibility and make his testimony subject
to grave suspicion, and require that it be weighed with great caution.
   "It is for you, as jurors, in the light of all the facts presented to you from
the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and
worth or its lack of quality and worth."
 
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose.
 
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he were a
principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of this
section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
501.11  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.  This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, "organization" means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity.  "Organization" does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.  (ORC 2901.23)
501.12  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization as defined in Section
501.11 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if he
acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the offense,
and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he engages in
conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such conduct,
or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he has direct
responsibility;
      (2)   He has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on the
organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
 
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
is subject to the same penalty as if he had acted in his own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
 
501.13  CONSPIRACY.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit or to promote or facilitate the
commission of aggravated murder, murder, kidnapping, abduction, compelling
prostitution, promoting prostitution, trafficking in persons, aggravated arson,
arson, aggravated robbery, robbery, aggravated burglary, burglary, engaging in
a pattern of corrupt activity, corrupting another with drugs, a felony drug
trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, theft of drugs,
or illegal processing of drug documents, the commission of a felony offense of
unauthorized use of a vehicle, illegally transmitting multiple commercial
electronic mail messages or unauthorized access of a computer in violation of
Ohio R.C. 2923.421 or the commission of a violation of any provision of Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that relates to hazardous
wastes, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   With another person or persons, plan or aid in planning the
commission of any of the specified offenses;
      (2)   Agree with another person or persons that one or more of them will
engage in conduct that facilitates the commission of any of the specified
offenses.
 
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of conspiracy unless a substantial overt
act in furtherance of the conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by
the accused or a person with whom the accused conspired, subsequent to the
accused’s entrance into the conspiracy.  For purposes of this section, an overt
act is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the
part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
 
   (c)   When the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
person with whom the offender conspires also has conspired or is conspiring
with another to commit the same offense, the offender is guilty of conspiring
with that other person, even though the other person’s identity may be unknown
to the offender.
 
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the conspiracy was impossible
under the circumstances.
 
   (e)   A conspiracy terminates when the offense or offenses that are its
objects are committed or when it is abandoned by all conspirators.  In the
absence of abandonment, it is no defense to a charge under this section that no
offense that was the object of the conspiracy was committed.
 
   (f)   A person who conspires to commit more than one offense is guilty of
only one conspiracy, when the offenses are the object of the same agreement or
continuous conspiratorial relationship.
 
   (g)   When a person is convicted of committing or attempting to commit a
specific offense or of complicity in the commission of or attempt to commit the
specific offense, the person shall not be convicted of conspiracy involving the
same offense.
   (h)   (1)   No person shall be convicted of conspiracy upon the testimony of
a person with whom the defendant conspired, unsupported by other evidence.
      (2)   If a person with whom the defendant allegedly has conspired
testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged
with conspiracy and if the testimony is supported by other evidence, the court,
when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following:
   “The testimony of an accomplice that is supported by other evidence does not
become inadmissible because of the accomplice’s complicity, moral turpitude, or
self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect
the witness’ credibility and make the witness’ testimony subject to grave
suspicion, and requires that it be weighed with great caution.
   It is for you, as jurors, in light of all the facts presented to you from
the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and
worth or its lack of quality and worth”.
      (3)   “Conspiracy”, as used in subsection (h)(1) of this section, does
not include any conspiracy that results in an attempt to commit an offense or
in the commission of an offense.
   (i)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge of conspiracy:
      (1)   After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor thwarted the
success of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of the actor’s criminal purpose.
      (2)   After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor abandoned the
conspiracy prior to the commission of or attempt to commit any offense that was
the object of the conspiracy, either by advising all other conspirators of the
actor’s abandonment, or by informing any law enforcement authority of the
existence of the conspiracy and of the actor’s participation in the conspiracy.
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of conspiracy, which is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, when the most serious offense that is the
object of the conspiracy is a felony of the fifth degree.
   (k)   This section does not define a separate conspiracy offense or penalty
where conspiracy is defined as an offense by one or more sections of this Code,
other than this section.  In such a case, however:
      (1)   With respect to the offense specified as the object of the
conspiracy in the other section or sections, subsection (a) hereof defines the
voluntary act or acts and culpable mental state necessary to constitute the
conspiracy;
      (2)   Subsections (b) to (i) hereof are incorporated by reference in the
conspiracy offense defined by the other section or sections of this Code.
   (l)   (1)   In addition to the penalties that otherwise are imposed for
conspiracy, a person who is found guilty of conspiracy to engage in a pattern
of corrupt activity is subject to divisions (B)(2) and (3) of Ohio R.C.
2923.32, division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2981.04 and division (D) of Ohio R.C.
2981.06.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to conspiracy and if
the most serious offense that is the object of the conspiracy is a felony drug
trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, in addition to
the penalties or sanctions that may be imposed for the conspiracy under
subsection (j) hereof and Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, both of the following apply:
         A.   The provisions of divisions (D), (F) and (G) of Ohio R.C.
2925.03, division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2925.04, division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2925.05,
division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2925.06 and division (E) of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 that
pertain to mandatory and additional fines, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit suspensions, and professionally licensed persons and that
would apply under the appropriate provisions of those divisions to a person who
is convicted of or pleads guilty to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing,
processing, or possession offense that is the most serious offense that is the
basis of the conspiracy shall apply to the person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to the conspiracy as if the person had been convicted or pleaded guilty
to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense
that is the most serious offense that is the basis of the conspiracy.
         B.   The court that imposes sentence upon the person who is convicted
of or pleads guilty to the conspiracy shall comply with the provisions
identified as being applicable under subsection (l)(2) of this section, in
addition to any other penalty or sanction that it imposes for the conspiracy
under subsection (j) of this section and Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929.
   (m)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession
offense” means any of the following that is a felony:
         A.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.05, or 2925.06;
         B.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 that is not a minor drug
possession offense.
      (2)   “Minor drug possession offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2925.01.  (ORC 2923.01)
501.99  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANORS.
   (a)   Financial Sanctions.  In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor committed under the Codified Ordinances, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this section.  If the court in its
discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Restitution.  Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor
or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court
under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the
offender’s crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on the
victim’s economic loss.  The court may not impose restitution as a sanction
pursuant to this section if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13.  If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine the amount of
restitution to be paid by the offender.  If the court imposes restitution, the
court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by
the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation report, estimates or
receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other
information, provided that the amount the court orders as restitution shall not
exceed the amount of the economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and
proximate result of the commission of the offense.  If the court decides to
impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution
if the offender, victim or survivor disputes the amount of restitution.  If the
court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has
the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the amount of
restitution sought from the offender.
All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic
loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim
against the offender.  No person may introduce evidence of an award of
restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of imposing
liability against an insurer under Ohio R.C. 3937.18.
If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the offender pay a
surcharge, of not more than five per cent of the amount of the restitution
otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing
restitution payments.
The victim or survivor may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered.  If the court grants the motion, it may
modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate.
      (2)   Fines.  A fine in the following amount:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000);
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00);
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00);
         E.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
      (3)   Reimbursement of costs of sanctions.
         A.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
            1.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community control
sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C. 2951.021;
            2.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined.
         B.   The amount of reimbursement ordered under subsection (a)(3)A. of
this section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is
able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions.  The court
may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under
that subsection.  If the court does not order reimbursement under that
subsection, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy
adopted under Ohio R.C. 2929.37.  In addition, the offender may be required to
pay the fees specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
            (ORC 2929.28)
   (b)   Jail Terms. 
      (1)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 of the Revised
Code, and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the
sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects
or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this General
Offenses Code, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of
the following:   
      A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one hundred
eighty days;
      B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than ninety days;
      C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than sixty days;
      D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than thirty days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this
section may permit the offender to serve the sentenced in intermittent
confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2929.26(B).  The court retains jurisdiction over every offender
sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the
court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01, has filed
a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case.  The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
         2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this section
and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a
county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, the court shall
specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for
participation in the program.  During the offender’s term in the county jail,
the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the
offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this section,
the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 a
reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term
is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 307.93,
341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and
Ohio R.C. 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is
required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in
subsection (b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times
specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate
of judgment against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in subsection (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
            (ORC 2929.24)
   (c)   Organizations.   Regardless of the penalties provided in subsections
(a) and (b) hereof, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section
501.11 shall be fined, in accordance with this section.  The court shall fix
the fine as follows:
 
Type of                                       Maximum
Misdemeanor                                   Fine
First degree                                  $5000.00
Second degree                                 4000.00
Third degree                                  3000.00
Fourth degree                                 2000.00
Minor                                         1000.00
Misdemeanor not specifically classified       2000.00
Minor misdemeanor not specifically classified 1000.00
      (1)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the
penalty provided in this subsection (c).
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
the fine that is provided in this subsection (c), then the penalty imposed
shall be pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section
defining the offense.
      (3)   This subsection (c) does not prevent the imposition of available
civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to
Section
501.11, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
subsection (c).
         (ORC 2929.31)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 505
Animals and Fowl
 
505.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; grazing.
505.02   Impounding and disposition.
505.03   Annual registration of dogs; tags required.
505.04   Abandoning animals.
505.05   Killing or injuring animals.
505.06   Poisoning animals.
505.07   Cruelty to animals generally.
505.071   Cruelty to companion animals.
505.08   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
505.09   Barking or howling animals or fowl.
505.10   Animal bites; reports and quarantine.
505.11   Hunting prohibited.
505.12   Coloring rabbits or baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
505.13   Dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes.
505.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Owner or keeper liable for damages - see Ohio R.C 951.10
Dog registration - see Ohio R.C. 955.01
Discharging firearms prohibited - see GEN. OFF.
549.02
 
505.01  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; GRAZING.
   (a)   No person being the owner or having charge of any horses, mules,
cattle, sheep, goats, swine, geese or any other animals shall permit the same
to run at large upon any street or public place, or upon any enclosed or
unenclosed land of another person, or cause such animals to be herded, kept or
detained within the City for the purpose of grazing the same on premises other
than those owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of such animals.
(Ord. 65-37.  Passed 3-1-65.)
 
   (b)   No person being the owner of or having charge of any dog, whether
wearing a registration tag or not, shall permit it to run at large upon any
public place or upon the premises of another.  No owner, keeper or harborer of
any female dog shall permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such owner or
keeper at any time such dog is in heat, unless such dog is properly on leash. 
The owner or keeper of every dog shall at all times keep such dog either
confined upon the premises of the owner or keeper, or under reasonable control
of some person. 
(ORC 955.22)
 
   (c)   The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in this section is prima-facie evidence that it is running at large
in violation of this section.
(ORC 951.02)
 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(ORC 955.99(D))
 
505.02  IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION.
   Any dog or other animal found running at large in violation of Section
505.01 may be impounded on sight and placed in the Animal Shelter maintained by
the Springfield and Clark County Humane Society.  The costs of impounding and
maintaining an animal in the Animal Shelter shall be paid by the owner or other
person having charge or control of the animal so impounded before the animal
may be returned by the agent in charge of the Animal Shelter to the owner or
other person having charge or control thereof.  When an animal is impounded,
the owner or person having charge or control of the animal shall be notified by
mail or by personal service, if known, or if not known, by publication of a
general description of the animal once in a local newspaper of general
circulation in Clark County.  In the event that the owner or person having
charge or control of the animal does not redeem the animal within a period of
three days from the mailing of the notice, the service of the notice or the
publication of the notice, then the agent in charge of the Animal Shelter may
make such disposition as he desires of such animal.
(Ord. 65-37.  Passed 3-1-65.)
 
505.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF DOGS; TAGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Except for guide dogs registered under Ohio R.C. 955.011 and dogs kept
by an institution or organization for teaching and research purposes under Ohio
R.C. 955.16, no person shall own, keep or harbor a dog more than three months
of age without annually registering such dog with the County Auditor.  Failure
of any dog at any time to wear a valid registration tag shall be prima-facie
evidence of lack of registration and subject such dog to impounding and
disposition as provided by Ohio R.C. 955.16.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(ORC 955.99(D)).
 
505.04  ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon such animal.  (ORC 959.01)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each
subsequent offense.
(ORC 959.99)
 
505.05  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully, and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a farm animal, dog, cat or other domestic animal that
is the property of another.  This section does not apply to a licensed
veterinarian acting in an official capacity.
(ORC 959.02)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section, if the value of the animal killed or
the injury done amounts to less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree; if the value of the animal killed or the
injury done amounts to three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more, such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 959.99(B))
 
505.06  POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a farm animal, dog, cat, poultry or other domestic animal that is
the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent
of the owner, place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by
any of such animals, either upon his own lands or the lands of another.
(ORC 959.03)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 959.99(C))
 
505.07  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during such confinement with a
sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during such
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer.  This subsection (a)(2) does not apply
to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter.  For the purpose of this
section, "shelter" means a man-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than
twenty-eight hours after they are so placed without supplying them with
necessary food, water and attention, nor permit such livestock to be so crowded
as to overlie, crush, wound or kill each other.
 
   (b)    Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which such livestock may be detained in any cars or compartments
without food, water and attention, may be extended to thirty-six hours without
penalty therefor.  This section does not prevent the dehorning of cattle.
(ORC 959.13)
 
   (c)     Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including, but not
limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock.  If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this subsection, the proceeds from the sale
first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of
the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. 
The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal. 
(ORC 959.99(D))
 
505.071 CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Companion animal” means any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in Ohio R.C. 956.01.  “Companion animal” does
not include livestock or any wild animal.
      (2)   “Cruelty”, “torment” and “torture” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
      (3)   “Residential dwelling” means a structure or shelter or the portion
of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of
a habitation.
      (4)   “Practice of veterinary medicine” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4741.01.
      (5)   “Wild animal” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (6)   “Federal animal welfare act” means the “Laboratory Animal Act of
1966", Pub.  L.  No.  89-544, 80 Stat.  350 (1966), 7 U.S.C.A. 2131 et seq., as
amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub.  L.  No.  91-579, 84 Stat. 
1560 (1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L.  No.  94-279,
90 Stat.  417 (1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985", Pub.  L.  No.  99-
198, 99 Stat.  1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
      (7)   “Dog kennel” means an animal rescue for dogs that is registered
under Ohio R.C. 956.06, a boarding kennel or a training kennel.
      (8)    "Boarding kennel" means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs solely for the purpose of providing shelter,
care, and feeding of the dogs in return for a fee or other consideration.
      (9)    "Training kennel" means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
      (10)    "Livestock" means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.
      (11)    "Captive white-tailed deer" means legally acquired deer that are
held in private ownership at a facility licensed under Ohio R.C. Section 943.03
or 943.031 and under Ohio R.C. Section 1533.71 or 1533.721.
 
   (b)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
 
   (c)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Torture, torment or commit an act or cruelty against the companion
animal;
      (2)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably
be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other
way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
      (3)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
 
   (d)   No owner, manager or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is the
custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the
following:
      (1)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
      (2)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably
be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other
way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
      (3)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
 
   (e)   Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to any of
the following:
      (1)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
      (2)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has been
issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (3)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
      (4)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
      (5)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
         (ORC 959.131)
 
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense.  On each subsequent offense
such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree
on each subsequent offense.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (4)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of this section to forfeit to an impounding agency, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 959.132, any or all of the companion animals in that
person’s ownership or care.  The court also may prohibit or place limitations
on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion animals for a
specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of this section to reimburse an impounding agency for the
reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care of a companion
animal that the agency impounded as a result of the investigation or
prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not otherwise paid
under Ohio R.C. 959.132.
      (5)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.  The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.  (ORC
959.99)
 
505.08  NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the Municipality
so as to create noxious, or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are
a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
 
   (b)   No person having possession of real property in the City of
Springfield shall permit the “mass feeding” of animals on real property
occupied by that person in the City of Springfield.
   “Mass feeding” occurs when cat, dog, or pet food or other edible material
attractive to animals is left out of doors where it is readily accessible to
feral cats, stray dogs, rodents, vermin and other species capable of carrying
disease.
 
   (c)   It shall not be a violation of subsection (b) of this section to:
      (1)   Permit cat, dog, pet food or other edible material attractive to
animals to be left out of doors if
         A.   The material is in a sealed container,
         B.   The material is in an unsealed container for the sole purpose of
feeding the occupant’s domestic pets, during daylight hours for a period not
exceeding four consecutive hours, or
         C.   The material is in a container suspended above the ground for the
feeding of birds or squirrels.
      (2)   Engage in the mass feeding of animals as part of a licensed kennel
operation on a lot zoned for such purpose.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates subsections (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  If the offender has been previously convicted of a
violation of any provision of this section, a subsequent violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 
   (e)   A violation of subsections (a) or (b) of this section may constitute a
“public nuisance” as defined in Section
1323.01(i) and subject to the procedures and provisions of Chapter
1323 of the Springfield Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 08-97.  Passed 4-8-08.)
 
505.09  BARKING OR HOWLING ANIMALS OR FOWL.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl which howls or
barks, or omits audible sounds which are unreasonably loud or disturbing and
which are of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood or to be detrimental to the life and health of
any individual.
(Ord. 67-235.  Passed 11-27-67.)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
505.10  ANIMAL BITES; REPORTS AND QUARANTINE.
   (a)   Whenever any animal shall bite any person, the Director of Health may
order such animal quarantined for a period extending not longer than ten days
from the time of the biting.  Any owner or person in custody or possession of
such animal who shall fail to comply with such quarantine order shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.  All expenses incurred for the keeping of such animal
or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall be borne
exclusively by the owner or keeper of such animal.  No person, having knowledge
of the existence of any rabies, or the fact that any animal has bitten any
other person, shall fail to immediately report such information to the Director
of Health.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
505.11  HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall hunt with a gun or with any other dangerous weapon any
bird or quadruped or any animal within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 63-181.  Passed 12-30-63.)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
 
505.12  COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings.  No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored.  No poultry younger than four weeks
of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots
of less than six.  Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(ORC 925.62)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
505.13  DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS AND RESTRICTED SNAKES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, “dangerous wild animal” and “restricted
snake” have the same meanings as set forth in Ohio R.C. 935.01.
 
   (b)   (1)   Except for a restricted snake specified in Ohio R.C. 935.01(L)
(1), no person shall sell or offer for sale at auction a dangerous wild animal
or restricted snake.
      (2)   Except for a microchip removed for purposes of a medical emergency
by a veterinarian that is qualified to provide veterinary care to the dangerous
wild animal, no person shall knowingly remove a microchip that is implanted in
a dangerous wild animal as required in Ohio R.C. 935.04.
      (3)   No person that possesses a dangerous wild animal or restricted
snake shall fail to post and display any of the following:
         A.   On each cage in which a dangerous wild animal is confined, signs
warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is confined in the cage;
         B.   At each entrance to the property where a dangerous wild animal is
confined, a sign warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is on the
property;
         C.   On each container in which a restricted snake is confined, a sign
warning the public that a restricted snake is in the container;
         D.   At the main entrance to each structure where a restricted snake
is confined, a sign warning the public that a restricted snake is in the
structure;
         E.   On a vehicle that is used to transport a dangerous wild animal or
restricted snake, a sign warning that a dangerous wild animal or restricted
snake, as applicable, is in the vehicle.
         The signs shall comply with standards established in rules adopted by
the State Director of Agriculture.
      (4)   No person shall allow a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake
to roam off the property where it is confined.
      (5)   No person shall remove any teeth or claws from a dangerous wild
animal or restricted snake, as applicable, unless determined to be medically
necessary by a veterinarian.  (ORC 935.18)
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree on the first offense.  On a second or subsequent offense, such person is
guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.  (ORC
935.99)
 
505.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 509
Disorderly Conduct and Peace Disturbance
509.01   Riot.
509.011   Inciting to violence.
509.02   Failure to disperse.
509.03   Disorderly conduct; intoxication.
509.04   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
509.05   Misconduct at an emergency.
509.06   Inducing panic.
509.07   Emergency orders and proclamations; obedience required.
509.08   Begging prohibited. (Repealed)
509.09   Sound trucks.
509.10   Political signs.  (Repealed)
509.11   Unreasonable noise.
509.12   Sound amplifying equipment regulated.
509.13   Motor vehicle noise control regulations.
509.131   Sound amplification systems in motor vehicles.
509.14   Stationary noise control regulations.
509.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law.
Criminal trespass - see Ohio R.C. 2911.21
Use of force to suppress riot - see Ohio R.C. 2917.05
Cordoning off riot areas, prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
Emergency suspension of permits and sales by Director of
Liquor Control - see Ohio R.C 4301.251
 
509.01  RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Section
509.03:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such institution.
 
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might otherwise
be lawful.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
509.011 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence, when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed;
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence.  If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. 
(ORC 2917.01)
509.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)    Where five or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Section
509.03, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and such other persons to disperse.  No
person shall knowingly fail to obey such order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) hereof, failure
to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in subsection (a) hereof, creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
(ORC 2917.04)
509.03  DISORDERLY CONDUCT; INTOXICATION.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture
or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any
person, which by its very utterance or usage inflicts injury or tends to incite
an immediate breach of the peace;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right of way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act which
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition which is physically offensive to persons or
which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act which
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (6)   Making unreasonably loud or disturbing noise by any means.
 
   (b)   No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he were
not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition which presents a risk of
physical harm to himself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation of subsection
(b) hereof.
 
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes
of subsection (b) hereof.
 
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (e)(3) and (e)(4),
disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (4)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of subsection (b) of this section, a violation of
subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (4)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2925.01. 
(ORC 2917.11)
509.04  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
such meeting, procession or gathering;
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 2917.12)
509.05  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person, engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
 
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If a violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at
an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
         (ORC 2917.13)
 
509.06  INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)    No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or
otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the
following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that such report
or warning is false;
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence;
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
 
   (b)    Division (a) hereof does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If inducing panic results in physical harm to
any person, economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, if the
public place involved in a violation of this section is a school or an
institution of higher education, or if the violation pertains to a purported,
threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (d)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of
the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the other
section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Economic harm” means any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of criminal conduct.  “Economic harm” as described in
this division includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the Municipality as a result of, or in
making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted the violation of
this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, including, but not limited to, all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (2)   “School” means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (3)   “Weapon of mass destruction” means any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or their precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(e)(3)D.1. of this section and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
      (4)   “Biological agent” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      (5)   “Emergency medical services personnel” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (6)   “Institution of higher education” means any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this State that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 1713.
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3332.  (ORC 2917.31)
509.07  EMERGENCY ORDERS AND PROCLAMATIONS; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   When there is a tumult, riot, mob or a body of people acting together
with the intent to commit a felony, or to do or offer violence to person or
property, or by force and violence to break or resist the law, or in the event
of a disaster affecting life and property and which substantially impairs the
functioning of the City government and its ability to protect the lives and
property of the people, the City Manager is authorized and directed to issue
executive orders covering the City at large or prescribed areas therein as he
deems necessary to protect life and property.  Such executive orders may
include, but are not limited to, the establishment of curfew; prohibiting the
sale of beer or intoxicating liquor; prohibiting the sale of firearms;
restricting or prohibiting movement into, out of or within the affected area or
areas; or prohibiting or limiting the assemblage of persons.  If the Mayor
deems it necessary to proclaim a state of emergency and govern the City by
proclamation, he is authorized to issue proclamations covering the City at
large or prescribed areas therein as he deems necessary to protect life and
property.  Such proclamations may include, but are not limited to the
establishment of curfew; prohibiting the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor;
prohibiting the sale of firearms; restricting or prohibiting movement into, out
of or within the affected area or areas; or prohibiting or limiting the
assemblage of persons.  In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the
Assistant Mayor shall be vested with the authority herein granted to the Mayor.
   (b)   No person shall fail to obey the lawful order of any police officer,
militiaman or other authorized person, and no person shall in any way
intentionally interfere with any person in the protection or preservation of
life or property during the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, as
provided in subsection (a) hereof.
(Ord. 67-186.  Passed 9-5-67.)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
509.08  BEGGING PROHIBITED. (REPEALED)
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  This section was repealed by Ordinance 18-268, passed
October 23, 2018.)
509.09  SOUND TRUCKS.
   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this section:
      (1)   "Person" includes the singular and the plural, and means any
person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other
form of association or organization.
      (2)   "Sound truck" means any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle,
having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.
      (3)   "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound.  "Sound amplifying
equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when
used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning
devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
 
   (b)   Noncommercial Use of Sound Trucks.
      (1)   Registration required.  No person shall use or cause to be used, a
sound truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial
purposes in the Municipality before filing a registration statement with the
City Manager in writing.  This registration statement shall be filed in
duplicate and shall state the following:
         A.   Name and home address of the applicant;
         B.   Address of place of business of the applicant;
         C.   License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
the applicant;
         D.   Name and address of person who owns the sound truck;
         E.   Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck;
         F.   Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the
sound truck;
         G.   The purpose for which the sound truck will be used;
         H.   A general statement as to the section or sections of the
Municipality in which the sound truck will be used;
         I.   The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck;
         J.   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck;
         K.   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is
to be used;
         L.   The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying
equipment to be used in or on the sound truck, and also the following:
            1.   The wattage to be used;
            2.   The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced;
and
            3.   The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be
thrown from the sound truck.
      (2)   Registration statement amendment.  All persons using or causing to
be used, sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration
statement filed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) hereof within forty-eight hours
after any change in the information therein furnished.
      (3)   Registration and identification.  The City Manager shall return to
each applicant under subsection (b)(1) hereof one copy of the registration
statement duly certified by the City Manager as a correct copy of the
application.  The certified copy of the application shall be in the possession
of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's
sound amplifying equipment is in operation, and the copy shall be promptly
displayed and shown to any police officer upon request.
      (4)   Regulations for use.  Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the
Municipality with sound amplifying equipment in operation are subject to the
following regulations:
         A.   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
         B.   Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on
Sundays and legal holidays when no operations are authorized.  The permitted
four hours of operation are between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., and
between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.
         C.   Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound
truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least
ten miles per hour, except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. 
Where stopped by traffic, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated
for longer than one minute at each such stop.
         D.   Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools,
churches or court houses.
         E.   No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be
operated in the business district.
         F.   The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd,
indecent or slanderous.
         G.   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound truck and so that
the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance
to persons within the area of audibility.
         H.   No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of
fifteen watts of power in the last stage of amplification.
 
   (c)   Commercial Advertising by Sound Truck Prohibited.  No person shall
operate or cause to be operated, any sound truck for commercial sound
advertising purposes in the Municipality with sound amplifying equipment in
operation.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 69-155.  Passed 9-2-69.)
 
509.10  POLITICAL SIGNS.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  This section was repealed by Ordinance 94-354, passed
September 27, 1994.)
509.11  UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   (a)   No person shall make, cause, or permit to be caused, any unreasonable
noise, which, because of its volume level, duration, or character, annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, safety, or peace and quiet
having due regard for the proximity of places of residence, hospitals, or other
residential institutions and to any other conditions affected by such noises. 
The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to any noise
originating from a fixed location, other than those on to which a D series
liquor permit has been issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.13 through 4303.183,
upon which activity is carried on which is specifically permitted by applicable
provisions of the Zoning Code other than those regulating Residential Office -
Residential and University uses.  (Ord.  91-95.  Passed 3-19-91.)
   (b)   The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or
device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto is declared to be an
unreasonable noise in violation of this section.  The operation of any such
set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section. 
(Ord.  97-183.  Passed 5-13-97.)
   (c)   Violation of this section is a minor misdemeanor.  Each day a
violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ord.  00-285.  Passed 8-8-00.)
509.12  SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT REGULATED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, "sound amplifying equipment" shall
have the same meaning as specified in Section
509.09(a)(3), and shall also include radios, television receivers, phonographs,
tape players, and other electronic equipment played at a volume sufficiently
loud to be heard at a distance of 25 feet.
(Ord.  97-183.  Passed 5-13-97.)
   (b)   No person shall use, or cause to be used, sound amplifying equipment
within any of the City's parks without the written consent of the Director of
Parks and Recreation, unless in conjunction with an activity officially
sponsored by the Division of Parks and Recreation.
   (c)   Violation of this section is a minor misdemeanor.  Each day a
violation occurs shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. 91-95.  Passed 3-19-91.)
509.13  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.  All definitions and terminology used in this section, not
defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
      (1)   "A-weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
      (2)   "Decibel, (db)" means a unit of sound pressure measurement as
defined by the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.
      (3)   "dB(A)" refers to a weighted scale for measuring decibel as defined
in the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.
      (4)   "Noise level" refers to the A-weighted sound level produced by a
motor vehicle.
      (5)   "Sound level meter" means an instrument which includes a
microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter,
and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.  Such instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American Standard Association Readings and
shall be made on a dB(A) scale.
      (6)   "Traffic noise" means sound made by a motor vehicle operated either
on the public right of way or private property.
      (7)   "Motor vehicle" means any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motor scooter, dune buggy, snowmobile, all terrain vehicles, go-carts,
minibikes, trail bikes, and trucks with gross vehicular weight of less than
8,000 pounds.
      (8)   "Modified exhaust system" means an exhaust system in which the
original noise abatement devices have been physically altered causing them to
be less effective in reducing noise or the original noise abatement devices
which are not as effective in reducing noise as their original devices, or
devices have been added to the original noise abatement devices such that noise
levels are increased.
 
   (b)   No person shall cause noise levels from the operation of motor
vehicles in excess of 80 db(A) in any area within the City at any time.  Such
noise level limit of 80 db(A) shall be based on a distance of not less than
fifteen feet from the noise source.
 
   (c)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle which causes excessive noise
levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of
an unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving, or tire squealing.
 
   (d)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this section the court
may admit evidence of a noise level as tested by any sound level meter which
meets or exceeds the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
specifications for type II equipment.
 
   (e)   Any emission of noise from any motor vehicle source in excess of the
limitations established by this section shall be deemed and is declared a
public nuisance.
 
   (f)   Violation of this section is a minor misdemeanor.  Each day a
violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 91-95.  Passed 3-19-91.)
 
509.131 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   In addition to any other prohibition set forth in this chapter, no
person shall operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway if the sound from
any sound amplifying equipment located inside of, outside of but attached to,
or held by a person inside, the motor vehicle, is discernible at a distance of
25 feet or more from the vehicle.
 
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The sound amplifying equipment of the motor vehicle is to warn
others of a hazardous road, vehicle operating, or traffic safety condition.
      (2)   The motor vehicle is an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
and is on an emergency run.
      (3)   The motor vehicle is owned and operated by the state, a political
subdivision, or a public utility.
      (4)   The motor vehicle is participating in a parade for which the
sponsors of the parade have obtained the proper permits.
      (5)   The sound amplifying equipment of the motor vehicle is being
operated as a requirement of federal or state law.
      (6)   Vendors of ice cream and related products between the hours of 9:00
o’clock a.m. and 8:00 o’clock p.m.
 
   (c)   Violation of this section is a minor misdemeanor.  For a second
offense committed within one year after the commission of the first offense,
violation of this section shall be a fourth degree misdemeanor.  For a third
and/or subsequent offense committed within one year after the commission of the
first offense, violation of this section is a third degree misdemeanor.
(Ord.  97-183.  Passed 5-13-97.)
 
509.14  STATIONARY NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.  All definitions and terminology used in this section, not
defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
      (1)   "A-weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
      (2)   "Decibel, (db)" means a unit of sound pressure measurement as
defined by the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.
      (3)   "dB(A)" refers to a weighted scale for measuring decibel as defined
in the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.
      (4)   "Noise level" refers to the A-weighted sound level produced by a
stationary source.
      (5)   "Person" means any individual, association, partnership or
corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality thereof.
      (6)   "Property line" means the line which represents the legal boundary
of property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person.  In cases involving sound
from an activity on a public street or other public right of way, the property
line shall be the nearest public right-of-way line.
      (7)   "Sound level meter" means an instrument which includes a
microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter,
and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.  Such instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American Standard Association Readings and
shall be made on a dB(A) scale.
      (8)   "Stationary noise" means sound made by any machine or device for
the amplification of the human voice or music, or any other sound originating
from a fixed location.
 
   (b)   Prohibitions.  No person shall cause or permit noise levels from the
operation of a stationary noise device or from any other source in excess of 64
dB(A) in any areas or districts of the City that are zoned Residential Office-
Residential, and University in the Zoning Code between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. or in excess of 70 dB(A) in any such areas or districts between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  All noise measurements shall be made on
the property line where the noise originates.  The prohibitions contained in
this paragraph shall not apply to any sound originating from a fixed location,
other than those as to which a D series liquor permit has been issued pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4303.13 through 4303.183, upon which activity is carried on which
is a legal nonconforming use, nor to any activity conducted in the public right
of way and expressly permitted, in writing, by an authorized City official.
 
   (c)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this section the court
may admit evidence of a noise level as tested by any sound level meter which
meets or exceeds the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
specifications for type II equipment.
 
   (d)   Any emission of noise from any stationary noise device in excess of
the limitations established by this section shall be deemed and is declared a
public nuisance.
 
   (e)   Violation of this section is a minor misdemeanor.  Each day a
violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 91-95.  Passed 3-19-91.)
 
509.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 511
Juvenile Curfew
 
511.01   Definitions.
511.02   Curfew for minors.
511.03   Exceptions.
511.04   Parental responsibility.
511.05   Police procedures.
511.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Liquor sales to underage persons - see GEN. OFF.
529.02,
529.021,
529.06
Underage purchase, consumption or possession - see GEN. OFF.
529.03
False information for liquor employment - see GEN. OFF.
529.10
Cigarette or tobacco distribution - see GEN. OFF.
537.03
Contributing to delinquency of - see GEN. OFF.
537.05
Parent culpability for delinquent acts - see GEN. OFF.
537.06 
511.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen, or, an equivalent
phrasing often herein employed, any person seventeen or less years of age.
   (b)   "Parent" means any person having legal custody of a minor:
      (1)   As a natural or adoptive parent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian;
      (3)   As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
      (4)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
   (c)   "Remain" means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon
the streets, including, but not limited to, the congregating of groups totaling
four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets
for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home.
   (d)   "Street" means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel or in
the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel.  The term street includes
the legal right of way, including, but not limited, the cartway or traffic
lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass, plots,
or other grounds found within the legal right of way of a street.  The term
street applies irrespective of what it is called or formerly named, whether
alley, avenue, court, road, or otherwise.  The term street shall also include
shopping centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, the
common areas of public housing developments, and similar areas that are open to
the use of the public.
   (e)   "Time of night" means the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern
Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour
by the public in Springfield, Ohio, prima facie the time then observed in the
Springfield, Ohio, administrative offices and police station.
   (f)   "Community service" means such public service as the Juvenile Court
shall determine is appropriate in connection with proved juvenile curfew
violations under this chapter.
      (Ord. 93-137.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
511.02  CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   No person seventeen years of age or less (under 18) shall be or remain in or
upon the streets within the City of Springfield, at night during the period
beginning at 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and ending at 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 93-137.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
511.03  EXCEPTIONS.
   In the following exceptional cases a minor in a City street during the
noctural hours for which Section
511.02 is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation shall not,
however, be considered in violation of the curfew ordinance:
   (a)   When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
   (b)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take such parent's place in accompanying such minor for a designated period of
time and purpose within a specified area.
   (c)   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly.
   (d)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor not communicating an
objection to the police officer.
   (e)   When returning home, by a direct route from, and within thirty minutes
of the termination of, a school activity, an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association, or place of employment.
   (f)   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged
in interstate movement through the City, or interstate travel beginning or
ending in the City.
      (Ord. 93-137.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
511.04  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent having legal custody of a minor shall knowingly permit or by
inefficient control allow, such minor to be or remain upon any City street
under circumstances not constituting an exception to or otherwise beyond the
scope of, this chapter.  The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in
that parent's legal custody.  It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or
careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental
responsibility through an objective test.  It shall be no defense that a parent
was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor.
(Ord. 93-137.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
511.05  POLICE PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Police procedures may provide that the police officer may deliver to a
parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example, a minor of
tender age (under the age of thirteen years) near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or known.
 
   (b)   Those minors who are found to be in violation of this curfew ordinance
shall be issued a citation by the police officer.  Except as provided in
subsection (a) hereof, such a minor shall not be delivered to a parent, but
shall be informed that he or she must proceed home without delay.
 
   (c)   In the case of a second or subsequent violation, the minor shall again
be issued a citation.  He or she shall also either be taken home or brought to
police headquarters.  The parent of such minor may be issued a citation for a
violation of Section
511.04.
(Ord. 93-137.  Passed 4-27-93.)
 
511.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   If a parent violates Section
511.04 in connection with a second, or subsequent, violation by a minor, this
shall be treated as a parental offense.  For such parental offense, a parent
shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
   (b)   Any minor who violates Section
511.02, shall be adjudged an unruly child, with such disposition of the case as
may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151.
(Ord. 93-217.  Passed 6-15-93.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 513
Drug Abuse Control
 
513.01   Definitions.
513.02   Gift of marihuana.
513.03   Drug abuse; controlled substance possession or use.
513.04   Illegal cultivation of marihuana.
513.05   Permitting drug abuse.
513.06   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
513.07   Hypodermic possession, display and dispensing.
513.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Using weapons while under the influence - see Ohio R.C. 2923.15
Federal prosecution bar to local prosecution - see Ohio R.C. 2925.50, 3719.19
Analysis report and notarized statement as evidence - see Ohio R.C 2925.51
Adulterating food with drug of abuse - see Ohio R.C. 3716.11
Criteria for granting probation - see Ohio R.C 3719.70(B)
 
513.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Administer" means the direct application of a drug, whether by
injection, inhalation, ingestion or any other means to a person or an animal.
      (ORC 3719.01)
   (b)   "Bulk amount" of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound and hashish and except as provided in subsection (b)(2), (5) or (6)
hereof, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or twenty-five unit
doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding thirty grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol, or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding twenty grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or thirty times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 52 Stat.  1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and
the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II
hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act and the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding one hundred twenty grams or thirty
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance
other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding twenty grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium
derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance.
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, sixteen
grams or sixteen milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance
that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid.
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound, or any other compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in schedule III, schedule IV, or schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in divisions (C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) of that
section will not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk
amount of the controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount
specified in subsection (b)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section for the
other schedule III, IV or V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.  (ORC 2925.01)
   (c)   "Controlled substance" means a drug, compound, mixture, preparation or
substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V.
   (d)   “Controlled substance analog” has the same meaning as provided in Ohio
R.C.  3719.01.
   (e)   "Counterfeit controlled substance" means:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to that trademark, trade name or identifying mark; or
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it;
or
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance; or
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its marking, labeling, packaging, distribution or the
price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (f)   "Cultivate" includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
      (ORC 2925.01)
   (g)   "Dangerous drug" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:
         A.   Under the “Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act”, 52 Stat.  1040
(1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, the drug is required to bear a label
containing the legend “Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without
prescription” or “Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on the
order of a licensed veterinarian” or any similar restrictive statement, or the
drug may be dispensed only upon a prescription;
         B.   Under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3715 or 3719, the drug may be dispensed
only upon a prescription.
      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance and that
is exempt from Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply;
      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human
body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.  (ORC 4729.01)
   (h)   “Deception” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (ORC 2925.01)
   (i)   "Dispense" means sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver.
   (j)   "Distribute" means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver but does not
include administering or dispensing a drug.  (ORC 3719.01)
   (k)   “Drug” means:
      (1)   Any article recognized in the United States pharmacopoeia and
national formulary, or any supplement to them, intended for use in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or
animals;
      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or animals;
      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of the body of humans or animals;
      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any article
specified in subsections (k)(1), (2) or (3) of this section; but does not
include devices or their components, parts or accessories.
         (ORC 4729.01)
   (l)   "Drug of abuse" means any controlled substance as defined in
subsection (c) hereof, any harmful intoxicant as defined in subsection (o)
hereof and any dangerous drug as defined in subsection (g) hereof.
      (ORC 3719.011)
   (m)   "Drug abuse offense" means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04 to 2925.06,
2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36
or 2925.37; or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of
drugs;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of this or any other state
or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in subsection (m)(1) hereof;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of this or any other
state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing or
attempting to commit any offense under subsection (m)(1), (2) or (3) hereof.
   (n)   "Felony drug abuse offense" means any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this State, any other state or the United
States.
   (n)(1)   “Fentanyl-related compound” means any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring, structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States Food and Drug Administration.
   (o)   "Harmful intoxicant" does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent;
         B.   Any aerosol propellant;
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant;
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (p)   “Hashish” means the resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or
liquid distillate form.
   (q)   "Hypodermic" means a hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument
or device for the injection of medication.  (ORC 3719.01)
   (r)   "Juvenile" means a person under eighteen years of age.
   (s)   (Former Ohio R.C. 2925.01(JJ) from which Section
513.01(s) was derived was repealed by Senate Bill 229, effective March 22,
2019.)
   (t)   "Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs”,
“prescriber” and “prescription” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (u)   "Manufacture" means to plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make,
prepare or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug by
propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination
of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities
incident to production.  (ORC 2925.01)
   (v)   "Manufacturer" means a person who manufactures a controlled substance
as “manufacture” is defined in Ohio R.C. 3715.01 and includes a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (w)   Except as provided in subsection (w)(2) hereof:
      (1)   “Marihuana” means all parts of a plant of the genus cannabis,
whether growing or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted
from a part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or
resin.  “Marihuana” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or
cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. 
(ORC 3719.01)
      (2)   “Marihuana” does not include hashish.  (ORC 2925.01)
   (x)   “Methamphetamine” means methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of
an isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer
of methamphetamine.  (ORC 2925.01)
   (y)   "Official written order" means an order written on a form provided for
that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision for the
order, if the order forms are authorized and required by Federal law.  (ORC
3719.01)
   (z)   Offense.
      (1)   An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a school” if the
offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or
within one thousand feet of the boundaries of any school premises, regardless
of whether the offender knows the offense is being committed on school
premises, in a school building, or within one thousand feet of the boundaries
of any school premises.  (ORC 2925.01)
      (2)   An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a juvenile” if the
offender commits the offense within one hundred feet of a juvenile or within
the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender knows the age of the
juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being committed within one
hundred feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the juvenile
actually views the commission of the offense.
   (aa)   "Pharmacist" means a person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729 to
engage in the practice of pharmacy.
   (bb)   "Pharmacy" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (cc)   "Poison” means any drug, chemical, or preparation likely to be
deleterious or destructive to adult human life in quantities of four grams or
less.
      (ORC 3719.01)
   (dd)   "Possess" or "possession" means having control over a thing or
substance but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or
substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing
or substance is found.
   (ee)   “Public premises” means any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena,
hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
      (ORC 2925.01)
   (ff)   "Sale" includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer or gift, or
offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.  (ORC 3719.01)
   (gg)   "Sample drug" means a drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would
be hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.  (ORC 2925.01)
   (hh)   "Schedule I", "Schedule II", "Schedule III", "Schedule IV" and
"Schedule V" mean controlled substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V
respectively, established pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.41, as amended pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.43 or 3719.44.  (ORC 3719.01)
   (ii)   "School" means any school operated by a board of education, any
community school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (jj)   "School building" means any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (kk)   "School premises" means either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense
is committed;
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   (ll)   "Standard pharmaceutical reference manual" means the current edition,
with cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State
Board of Pharmacy.
   (mm)   "Unit dose" means an amount or unit of a compound, mixture or
preparation containing a controlled substance, that is separately identifiable
and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the
controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
      (ORC 2925.01)
   (nn)   "Wholesaler" means a person who, on official written orders other
than prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes a "wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs" as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (ORC 3719.01)
 
513.02  GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly give or offer to make a gift of twenty grams
or less of marihuana.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trafficking in marihuana. 
Trafficking in marihuana is a minor misdemeanor for the first offense and, for
any subsequent offense, it is a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the
offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or the vicinity of a
juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   The court may suspend for not less than six months or more than five
years the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of any person who
is convicted of or pleads guilty to any violation of this section.  If an
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit is suspended
pursuant to this subsection, the offender, at any time after the expiration of
two years from the day on which the offender’s sentence was imposed, may file a
motion with the sentencing court requesting termination of the suspension; upon
the filing of such a motion and the court’s finding of good cause for the
termination, the court may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.03)
513.03  DRUG ABUSE; CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POSSESSION OR USE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
 
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose
conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration;
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act", 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and is
sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or administered for that purpose
in accordance with that Act;
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged or obtained through deception or commission of a theft offense.
         `   As used in subsection (b)(1)D. of this section, “deception” and
“theft offense” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in subsection (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   “Community addiction services provider” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 5119.01.
            2.   “Community control sanction” and “drug treatment program” have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
            3.   “Health care facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2919.16.
            4.   “Minor drug possession offense” means a violation of this
section that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            5.   “Post-release control sanction” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2967.28.
            6.   “Peace officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
            7.   “Public agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2930.01.
            8.   “Qualified individual” means a person who is not on community
control or post-release control and is a person acting in good faith who seeks
or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug
overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
subsection (b)(2)B. of this section.
            9.   “Seek or obtain medical assistance” includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to subsection (b)(2)F. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be the basis of
the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual seeking the
medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to subsection (b)(2)G. of this section, within thirty
days after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified
individual seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment
from a community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed
addiction treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to subsection (b)(2)G. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
subsection (b)(2)B.1. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that subsection.  The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person is found to be in violation of any community control
sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court
shall first consider ordering the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified
in Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, whichever is applicable, after which
the court has the discretion either to order the person’s participation or
continued participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty
with the mitigating factor specified in any of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that overdose or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in subsection (b)(2)B. of
this section.
         D.   If a person is found to be in violation of any post-release
control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following,
the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.141 or 2967.28, whichever is
applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the discretion either
to order the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug
treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified
in either of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that emergency or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in subsection (b)(2)B. of
this section.
         E.   Nothing in subsection (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of subsection (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to subsection (b)(2)B. of this
section for a minor drug possession offense;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to the effective date of this amendment to any
public agency or to an employee of any public agency.
         F.   Subsection (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under subsection (b)(2)B. of
this section.  No person shall be granted an immunity under subsection (b)(2)B.
of this section more than two times.
         G.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V, whoever violates
subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of drugs.  Possession of drugs is
a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the bulk
amount.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of marihuana. 
Possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved
does not exceed 200 grams.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2)B. hereof,
possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of hashish.  Possession of
hashish is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the
maximum amount specified in subsection (c)(3)B. hereof.  The penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3)B. hereof,
possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction that is imposed for an offense under
this section,  the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not less than six
months or more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit.
   (e)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.  (ORC 2925.11)
513.04  POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not less than six months
or more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit.  (ORC 2925.12)
513.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person, who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C
4501.01(A), shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of
a felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit the premises, or real estate, including vacant land, to
be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the felony drug abuse offense in question
is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02,  2925.03, 2925.04 or 2925.041 as provided
in Ohio R.C. 2925.13, permitting drug abuse is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this
section, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of this section may suspend for not less than six months or more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
   (e)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of subsection (b) hereof constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant
to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2925.13)
513.06  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed by a
manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist or licensed health professional authorized
to prescribe drugs who dispenses a controlled substance in a package or
container, as long as any of the original contents remain, except when lawfully
filling a prescription.  (ORC 3719.08)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree, if the offender has not previously been convicted of a violation of
this section, Ohio R.C .3719.07 or 3719.08 or a drug abuse offense.  (ORC
3719.99(C))
513.07  HYPODERMIC POSSESSION, DISPLAY AND DISPENSING.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent or employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic was lawfully obtained and is kept and
used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin or other drug prescribed
for the treatment of disease by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)    A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division
(a) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.  If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B) or (E), or 3719.31 or
a drug abuse offense, a violation is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC
3719.99(D))
513.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 517
Gambling
517.01   Definitions.
517.02   Gambling.
517.03   Operating a gambling house.
517.04   Public gaming.
517.05   Cheating.
517.06   Methods of conducting a bingo game; prohibitions.
517.07   Instant bingo conduct.
517.08   Raffles.
517.09   Charitable instant bingo organizations.
517.10   Location of instant bingo.
517.11   Bingo or game of chance records.
517.12   Bingo operator prohibitions.
517.13   Bingo exceptions.
517.14   Instant bingo conduct by a veteran’s or fraternal  organization.
517.15   Seizure and destruction of gambling devices.
517.16   Skill-based amusement machines.
517.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Lotteries prohibited; exception - see Ohio Const., Art. XV, Sec. 6
Contributing to delinquency of minors - see Ohio R.C. 2151.41
Search warrants - see Ohio R.C. 2933.21(E)
Licensing charitable bingo games - see Ohio R.C. 2915.08
 
517.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Bookmaking" means the business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (b)   "Bet" means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an
event, undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business
risk.
   (c)   "Scheme of chance" means a slot machine unless authorized under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery unless authorized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770,
numbers game, pool conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not
include bingo, a skill-based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for
profit.  “Scheme of chance” includes the use of an electronic device to reveal
the results of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or
indirectly, for a chance to win a prize.  Valuable consideration is deemed to
be paid for a chance to win a prize in the following instances:
      (1)   Less than fifty per cent of the goods or services sold by a scheme
of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
      (2)   Less than fifty per cent of participants who purchase goods or
services at any one location do not accept, use or redeem the goods or services
sold or purportely sold;
      (3)   More than fifty per cent of prizes at any one location are revealed
to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in Ohio R.C. 3772.01;
      (4)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange
for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
      (5)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
      (6)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase additional
game entries;
      (7)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using points
or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
      (8)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
twenty per cent of the gross revenue received at one location; or
      (9)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
As used in this subsection, “electronic device” means a mechanical, video,
digital or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors.
   (d)   "Game of chance" means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which
a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (e)   "Game of chance conducted for profit” means any game of chance
designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of
chance, but does not include bingo.
   (f)   "Gambling device" means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter.
   (g)   "Gambling offense" means the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 to 2915.092, 2915.10 or 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in subsection (g)(1) hereof or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing an
offense under subsection (g)(1), (2) or (3) hereof.
   (h)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, "charitable
organization" means either of the following:
      (1)   An organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that currently is in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a)
and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (2)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal, income taxation under subsection 501
(c)(4), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code.
To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have been in
continuous existence as such in this State for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under Ohio R.C. 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2915.02.
   (i)   "Religious organization" means any church, body of communicants or
group that is not organized or operated for profit, that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (j)   "Veteran's organization" means any individual post or state
headquarters of a national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any
individual post of a national veteran's association, which post, state
headquarters, or auxiliary unit  is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and
either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national
veteran’s association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is
in good standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a
letter from the national veteran’s association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran’s association.  As
used in this subsection, “national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least five thousand
persons.
   (k)   "Volunteer firefighter's organization" means any organization of
volunteer firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire
department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a
county, municipal corporation, or township.
   (l)   "Fraternal organization" means any society, order, state headquarters,
or association within this State, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business
of sodality of its members.
   (m)   "Volunteer rescue service organization" means any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
   (n)   "Charitable bingo game" means any bingo game described in subsection
(o)(1) or (2) of this section that is conducted by a charitable organization
that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08 and the proceeds of
which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (o)   "Bingo" means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
twenty-five spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of
spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a
combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being
designated as a free space.
         B.   The participants cover the space on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator.
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically from a receptacle that contains seventy-five
objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different
combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the seventy-
five possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the
bingo cards or sheets.
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers as described in subsection (o)(1)C. hereof, that a predetermined and
preannounced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo card or sheet being
used by a participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles.
   (p)   "Conduct" means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor,
or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.
   (q)   "Bingo game operator" means any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but not limited to,
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.
   (r)   "Participant" means any person who plays bingo.
   (s)   "Bingo session" means a period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in subsection (o)(1) of this section, instant bingo, and seal
cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in subsection (s)(1) of this section.
   (t)   "Gross receipts" means all money or assets, including admission fees,
that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for
prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. "Gross receipts" does
not include  any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by
a charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a  bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (u)   "Security personnel" includes any person who either is a sheriff,
deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or a police
officer of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a peace
officer's training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to 109.79 and who is
hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   (v)   “Charitable purpose" means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)
(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least seventy-five per cent of the members of which are
veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are individuals
who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided
that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided
that the net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the
charitable purposes set forth in division (B)(12) of Ohio R.C. 5739.02, is used
for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in
division (B)(12) of Ohio R.C. 5739.02, is donated to a governmental agency, or
is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio
flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit
organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this State for fifteen years and that uses the net profit exclusively for
religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for
the prevention of cruelty to children or animals if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under subsection 170 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in subsection (k) of this section.
   (w)   "Internal Revenue Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U..S.C. 1, as now or hereafter amended.
   (x)   "Youth athletic organization" means any organization, not organized
for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are twenty-one
years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
   (y)   "Youth athletic park organization" means any organization, not
organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least one hundred days per year
for athletic activities by one or more organizations not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are eighteen
years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association;
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year,
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in paragraph (1) hereof.
   (z)   "Bingo supplies" means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or
cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and  devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
"bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided,  and
used, in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "bingo
supplies" are not to be considered equipment used  to conduct a bingo game.
   (aa)   “Instant bingo" means a form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower.  In all “instant bingo” the prize amount and
structure shall be predetermined. "Instant bingo" does not include any device
that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an
equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor
that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in
winning or losing combinations.
   (bb)   “Seal card" means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo
tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals
that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.
   (cc)   “Raffle" means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are
won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more
winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other
detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable
sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.  “Raffle” does not
include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (dd)   "Punch board" means a board containing a number of holes or
receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly,
serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.
   (ee)   "Gross profit" means gross receipts minus the amount actually
expended for the payment of prize awards.
   (ff)   "Net profit" means gross profit minus expenses.
   (gg)   "Expenses" means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually
expended for all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in Ohio R.C. 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under
division (B)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (hh)   “Person" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and includes any
firm or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (ii)   “Revoke" means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (jj)   “Suspend" means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of
the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082
or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (kk)   "Distributor" means any person who purchases or obtains bingo
supplies and who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this State;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this State.
   (ll)   "Manufacturer" means any person who assembles completed bingo
supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies,
converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale.
   (mm)   “Gross annual revenues" means the annual gross receipts derived from
the conduct of bingo described in subsection (o)(1) of this section plus the
annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (o)
(2) of this section.
   (nn)   "Instant bingo ticket dispenser" means a mechanical device that
dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed
and that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or nonwinning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket or
card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (oo)   (1)   "Electronic bingo aid" means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased  at the time and place
of a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   "Electronic bingo aid" does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (pp)   “Deal of instant bingo tickets" means a single game of instant bingo
tickets all with the same serial number.
   (qq)   (1)   "Slot machine” means either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill-based amusement machine or
an instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   (rr)   “Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo" means
gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and  reasonable expense expended
for the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo
conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization, minus the payment
by that organization of real property taxes, and assessments levied on a
premises on which instant bingo is conducted.
   (ss)   "Charitable instant bingo organization" means an organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is a charitable
organization as defined in this section. A "charitable instant bingo
organization" does not include a charitable organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is created by a veteran's
organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards
to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.13.
   (tt)   “Game flare” means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of
instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (uu)   (1)   “Skill-based amusement machine” means mechanical, video,
digital, or electronic device that rewards the player or players, if at all,
only with merchandise prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for
merchandise prizes, provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game
all of the following apply:
         A.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result of
the single play of a machine does not exceed ten dollars;
         B.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine are
not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than ten
dollars;
         C.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars times the fewest number of
single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain
that prize; and
         D.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed at
the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for purposes of
division (uu)(1) of this section even if the skill-based amusement machine for
the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where gasoline may
not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not redeemable at the
location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game.
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game.
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions.
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player.
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in subsection (uu)(1) of this section:
         A.   As used in subsection (uu) of this section, “game” and “play”
mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the results of
play are determined without payment of additional consideration.  An individual
utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on
the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased.  The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single
noncontest, competition or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of subsection (uu)(1) of this section, the mere
presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the
game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (vv)   “Merchandise prize” means any item of value, but shall not include
any of the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in subsection (vv)(1), (2) or (3) of this section.
   (ww)   “Redeemable voucher” means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or
other noncash representation of value.
   (xx)   “Pool not conducted for profit” means a scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount
of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (yy)   “Sporting organization” means a hunting, fishing or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that
is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to, the league of Ohio
sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this State for a period
of three years.
   (zz)   “Community action agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
122.66.
   (aaa)   (1)   “Sweepstakes terminal device” means a mechanical, video,
digital or electronic machine or device that is owned, leased or otherwise
possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners,
affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended to be used by a
sweepstakes participant, and that is capable of displaying information on a
screen or other mechanism.  A device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of
the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this subsection and in Section
517.02:
         A.   “Enter” means the act by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry” means one event from the initial activation of the
sweepstakes terminal device until all of the sweepstakes prize results from
that activation are revealed.
         C.   “Prize” means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility” means any location in this
Municipality where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in Ohio R.C.  2915.02(G).
   (bbb)   “Sweepstakes” means any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan,
or other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to
win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is
based upon chance.  “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
this chapter, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 3772.
      (ORC 2915.01) (Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
 
517.02  GAMBLING.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking;
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood;
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in subsection (vv)(1),
(2), (3) or (4) of Section
517.01 as a prize for playing or participating in a sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
ten dollars and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating
in a sweepstakes.  Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a
merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by division (F) of Ohio R.C. 2915.02.
      (7)   With purpose to violate subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) or
(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device.
 
   (b)   For purposes of subsection (a)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including, without
limitation, playing any such game or scheme.
 
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
 
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.    The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is, exempt
from Federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance.
A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran's or
fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (d)(1)C.
hereof if the veteran's or fraternal organization has already leased the
premises twelve times during the preceding year to charitable organizations for
that purpose.  If a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran's or
fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (d)(1)C.
hereof, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the
premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session
that a charitable organization may pay under Section
517.06(b)(1) when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, or given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any
organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), (2) or (3) of the
Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that
is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during, or within ten hours
of, a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Section
517.13.
No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donations,
gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating
or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament operated under a permit issued under
Ohio R.C. 1533.92, as "tag fishing tournament" is defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (e)   Subsection (d) hereof shall not be construed to authorize the sale,
lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games of
chance, as granted by subsection (d) hereof, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
 
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling
offense, gambling is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State
law.  (ORC 2915.02)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
 
517.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of Section
517.02;
      (2)   Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Section
517.02.
 
   (b)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a gambling
house, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
517.04  PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision, of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of subsection (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of subsection (b) of this
section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Chapter
3767.  (ORC 2915.04)
517.05  CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet;
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event;
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance;
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of cheating.  Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection cheating is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the potential gain from the cheating is one thousand dollars
($1,000) or more, or if the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
cheating is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.  (ORC
2915.05)
517.06  METHODS OF CONDUCTING A BINGO GAME; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in Section
517.01(v), or distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of
instant bingo as stated in its license application and in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2915.101.
 
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
Section
517.01(o)(1) shall fail to do any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable  organization for a rental rate not in excess of
the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per bingo session or forty-five per
cent of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased
from a person other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is
not more than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in
location, size, and quality but not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00) per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other
than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another
charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other  charitable
organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of
four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session. No charitable
organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises that
the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo
sessions.  If the charitable organization leases from a person  other than a
charitable organization the premises on which it  conducts bingo sessions, the
lessor of the premises shall  provide the premises to the organization and
shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other
type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises
that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is
not a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week.
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with the definition of
bingo set forth in Section
517.01(o)(1).
 
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
Section
517.01(o)(1) shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or  beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the  charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any  compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than six thousand dollars ($6,000) in prizes for bingo
games described in Section
517.01(o)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the charitable
organization.  “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of instant
bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between two a.m. and ten a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.12, at any
premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any
time period not specified on its license.  Subsection (c)(6) of this section
does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at nine a.m. for
a bingo session that begins at ten a.m.  If circumstances make it impractical
for the charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or
on the day of the week or at the time, specified on its license or if a
charitable organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or
at a time other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable
organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended
license, pursuant to division (F) of Ohio R.C. 2915.08. A charitable
organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended license to
conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or
time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted, the
organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of eighteen to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo  supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than ninety bingo faces
can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo  aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119  that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may
include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited
by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played
during each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under eighteen years of age to play bingo described in
Section
517.01(o)(1).
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) hereof, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or  other form of compensation, directly or
indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other
work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) hereof, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in subsection (d) hereof prohibits an employee of a
fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization from
selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or invited
guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any
receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this  section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of  premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo
sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week
on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of
premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than
two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the
premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more than four
sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or
person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that
will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on
which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with
each organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney
General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct
the sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney
General prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2), or (3), (c)(1) to (11) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2) or (3), (c)
(1) to (11), or (d) of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2),
(b)(1), (2) or (3) or (c)(1) to (11) or (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  Whoever violates subsection (c)(12) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of subsection (c)(12) of this section, a
violation of subsection (c)(12) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
(ORC 2915.09)
517.07  INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of divisions (A)(1), (2), and
(3) of Ohio R.C. 2915.09;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a),
is described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, is a
charitable organization as defined in Section
517.01, is in good standing in the State pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08, and is
in compliance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a),
is described in subsection 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) or is a
veteran’s organization described in subsection 501(c)(4) of the Internal
Revenue Code, and conducts instant bingo under Section
517.14.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed  under Ohio R.C. 
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under eighteen
years of age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator  who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in Section
517.09(d);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Subsection (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game.  In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that  was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as reflected on
an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information
required by Section
517.11(f);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in  accordance with
Ohio R.C.  2915.01 to 2915.13.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section or a rule adopted
under Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C) is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct.  Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or of such a rule, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
(ORC 2915.091)
517.08  RAFFLES.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a charitable
organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community
school, or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501
(a) and is described in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code may conduct a raffle to
raise money for the organization or school and does not need a license to
conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit.
      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in subsection (a)(1)
of this section, but that is not also described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall
distribute at least fifty per cent of the net profit from the raffle to a
charitable purpose described in Section
517.01(v) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or
any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.092)
517.09  CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "retail income from all commercial activity"
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. 
A religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, at not more than one location at which it conducts its charitable
programs, may include donations from its members and guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable  instant bingo organization
shall enter into a written contract  with the owner or lessor of the location
at which the instant  bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist
in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each
location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being
conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract
with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of
the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct
of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more
than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract pursuant
to subsection (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets.  The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay six per cent of the
total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this subsection.
   As used in this subsection, “expenses” means those items provided for in
subsections (gg)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (12) and (13) of Section
517.01 and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted.  “Expenses” in the aggregate, shall not
exceed six per cent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo
tickets.
   As used in this subsection, “full gross profit” means the amount by which
the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal had been sold in
full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with an owner
or lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Subsection (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session on the premises
where the organization conducts firefighter training, that has conducted
instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and
that, during each of those five years, had gross receipts of at least one
million five hundred thousand dollars. 
(ORC 2915.093)
517.10  LOCATION OF INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of  instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Section
517.09, with the charitable instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct
of instant bingo other than at a bingo session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating
any provision of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)    Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section is
guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise  provided in this
subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a  misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
subsection (c) or (d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or
lessor's premises that is issued by the State or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.  (ORC 2915.094)
517.11  BINGO OR GAME OF CHANCE RECORDS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Section
517.02(d), shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant  bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization,  the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or  more
in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of the bingo
or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Section
517.01(v), Section
517.02(d), or Ohio R.C. 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list
of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo  session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from "gross receipts" Section
517.01(t);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (b)    A charitable organization shall keep the records that it  is required
to maintain pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at its principal place
of business in this State or at its headquarters in this State and shall notify
the Attorney General  of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in Section
517.01(o)(1) or (2) shall be deposited into a checking account devoted
exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable expenses
incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and payments to recipients of
some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game shall be made only
by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the bingo session or game
account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this State.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or  other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or  otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three  years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this State. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of  all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   The Attorney General, or any law enforcement agency, may do all of the
following:
      (1)   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member, or employee of the organization;
      (2)   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
      (3)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
      (4)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of chance
are conducted;
      (5)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred and to determine
whether Section
517.12 has been complied with.
   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a
charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of
the organization has violated any provision of this chapter, the law
enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this
chapter, provided that the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to
the Attorney General when commencing an action as described in this subsection.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable  organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit,
or  observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (h) of
this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC 2915.10)
517.12  BINGO OPERATOR PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless he is eighteen years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  (ORC 2915.11)
517.13  BINGO EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section
517.06 et seq. of this chapter do not apply to bingo games that are conducted
for the purpose of amusement only.  A bingo game is conducted for the purpose
of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements specified in
either subsection (a)(1) or (2) hereof:
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value including an admission fee, or any fee for bingo cards, sheets, objects
to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo, for the privilege
of participating in the bingo game or to defray any costs of the game, or pay
tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are nonmonetary,
and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlements to goods or services
only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section
517.06 et seq. of this chapter;
            2.   A scheme or game of chance or bingo described in Section
517.01(o)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed fifty.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
(25¢) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other
devices used in playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section
517.06 et seq. of this chapter;
            2.   A scheme of chance or game of chance or bingo described in
Section
517.01(o)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General, or any local law enforcement agency, may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with subsection (a) hereof.  A local law
enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this
section if the local law enforcement agency gives written notice to the
Attorney General when commencing the action.  (ORC 2915.12)
517.14  INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT BY A VETERAN’S OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   A veteran's organization, a fraternal  organization, or a sporting
organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to Ohio R.C. 
2915.01 to 2915.12 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to twelve hours during any day,
provided that the sale does not begin earlier than ten a.m. and ends not later
than two a.m.
      (2)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its
own members and invited guests.
      (3)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in
subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and
is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in subsection (b) of this section.
   (b)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section is raising money for another organization that is described in
subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and
is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State, the veteran’s
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a
written contract with the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)
(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, and that is in good standing in this State in order to conduct instant
bingo.  That contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net
proceeds that the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization will be
distributing to the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509
(a)(2) or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in
good standing in this State.
   (c)   (1)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal  organization or a
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or
cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2915.
      (2)   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of
this  section shall violate any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's organization,
fraternal organization, or a sporting organization has entered into a written
contract.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal  instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2915.13)
517.15  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF GAMBLING DEVICES.
   The Chief of Police, or any other police officer, shall destroy all such
tables, banks, devices and apparatus that shall come into his possession under
the provisions of this chapter or in any other way, when ordered to do so by
the judge having jurisdiction thereof.
(Ord. 76-359.  Passed 11-16-76.)
517.16  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall give to another person any item described in
Section
517.01(vv)(1), (2), (3), or (4) in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or
novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement
machine or for a free or reduced-prize game won on a skill-based amusement
machine.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct.  Except as provided herein, a
violation of subsection (a)(1) is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each
redemption of a prize that is involved in the violation.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1), a violation
of subsection (a)(1) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
         (ORC 2915.06)
   (b)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1345.
(ORC 2915.061)
517.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 521
Health, Safety and Sanitation
 
521.01   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
521.02   Venting of heaters and burners.
521.03   Barricades and warning lights; abandoned excavations.
521.04   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury.
521.05   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances.
521.06   Nuisance conditions on public property.
521.07   Placing articles on streets and public grounds.
521.08   Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk, etc.
521.09   Noxious or offensive odors.
521.10   Camping in floodplain safety.
521.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Flagpole installation in sidewalk - see Ohio R.C. 723.012
Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
Removal of noxious weeds or litter - see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
Nuisances - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
Tampering with safety devices - see GEN. OFF.
541.03
 
521.01  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container
which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of
fifty square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge,
latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without
rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouseman or repairman.
(ORC 3767.29)
521.02  VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   A brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace, water
heater or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil, kerosene,
gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and tending to
give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gas:
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning;
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in subsection (a) hereof, or
used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
 
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
 
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
 
   (d)   Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or
room heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device,
or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater
that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shutoff system, and that has
its fuel piped from a source outside of the building in which it is located,
that are approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire
Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
 
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
subsection (a) hereof when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10.  No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this subsection.
 
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this subsection.
 
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below one hundred degrees fahrenheit or thirty-seven and eight-
tenths degrees centigrade shall be sold, offered for sale or used in any
kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
 
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from subsection (a)
hereof unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use."
 
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under
Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
 
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
 
521.03  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
 
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
 
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
521.04  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk,
playground or other public place any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage property of another or injure any person or
animal traveling along or upon such sidewalk or playground.
 
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
 
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of such articles.  In no such case shall the obstruction
remain on such sidewalk for more than one hour.
 
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.  The affected area shall be rendered safe and free from danger.
 
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous condition.
 
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
521.05  NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law:
   To fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid substances therefrom,
or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains or natural
watercourses as provided in Ohio R.C. 715.47.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
521.06  NUISANCE CONDITIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall create any nuisance dangerous to persons or property
or make, or cause to be made any excavation in, or place or cause to be placed
any obstruction upon, or occupy or cause to be occupied with building or other
material, any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, pavement, or other
public ground, unless duly authorized by law or the proper City officials.
(1907 Code Sec. 279)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
521.07  PLACING ARTICLES ON STREETS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   (a)   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited on
any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds of the City, any wood, coal, box,
barrel, crate, cask, keg, casting, lumber, goods, wares, furniture, merchandise
or any other material or obstruction whatsoever, except for such reasonable
time as may be actually necessary for receiving or discharging the same from
some store, building or other place.  In such event the same shall be placed so
as not to block the street, alley, sidewalk or public ground upon which it is
placed or so as not to interfere with the free passage of water in the gutters
of such street or alley.  This section does not apply to such cases of a
temporary use of the street or sidewalk as are now or may hereafter be
authorized by ordinance or resolution of the City Commission or by permit from
the City Manager.  However, the City Manager, upon signing of the proper
releases by the applicant, may authorize the placing on any sidewalk temporary
and permanent ornamental or functional devices.
(Ord. 66-230.  Passed 12-19-66.)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
521.08  LITTERING AND DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, JUNK, ETC.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
521.10, no person shall, without lawful authority, place or dispose of in any
manner, upon any public property or upon the premises of another, any paper,
trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse, junk or any substance or material which
is or may become noxious, offensive, injurious or dangerous to the public
health, comfort or safety.
(Ord. 75-259.  Passed 9-9-75.)
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse
or any other noxious or offensive materials or substances to be collected or
remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public, or
unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render unwholesome or impure,
any natural watercourse.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
521.09  NOXIOUS OR OFFENSIVE ODORS.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling, building,
structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade, employment
or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 92-261.  Passed 8-11-92.)
521.10  CAMPING IN FLOODPLAIN SAFETY.
   (a)   Any owner of property in the 100 year floodplain area, who allows the
use of said floodplain by occupied recreational vehicles, tent campers, or
other temporary housing, has the obligation to provide warning to such users
anytime the adjacent watercourse rises from its banks.
   (b)   In order to allow for an orderly and safe evacuation of the floodplain
area, owners of property described in subparagraph (a), above, shall oblige all
temporary residents of their floodplain property to be ready to depart on short
notice.  Specifically, recreational vehicles, camping trailers and similar
vehicles must have functioning tires and undercarriage, and have their
departure path unobstructed by fences or other barricades.
(Ord.  00-305.  Passed 9-5-00.)
521.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 523
Smoking Prohibitions
523.01   Definitions.
523.02   Prohibition.
523.03   Signs; posting, content and location.
523.04   Enforcement.
523.05   Other prohibitions not affected.
523.06   Violation.
523.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Cigarette or tobacco distribution to minors - see GEN. OFF.
537.03
523.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
   (b)   "City-owned and occupied facilities" means all enclosed areas which
are owned by the City of Springfield, Ohio, and occupied by an employee or
employees of the City who are carrying out their assigned duties on behalf of
the City therein, except the pro shops and restaurants at City-owned golf
courses.
   (c)   "Enclosed area" means all space between a floor and ceiling which is
enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of door or passage
ways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein
screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, or
similar structures.
   (d)   "Smoking" means the lighting, holding or carrying of, or emitting or
exhaling the smoke of, a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.
      (Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
523.02  PROHIBITION.
   No person shall smoke in any City-owned and occupied facility.
(Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
 
523.03  SIGNS; POSTING, CONTENT AND LOCATION.
   The City shall post or cause to be posted and prominently displayed, and
shall maintain, "No Smoking" signs in conspicuous locations within all City-
owned and occupied facilities.  Such signs shall clearly and conspicuously
recite the phrase "No Smoking" and/or use the international no-smoking symbol. 
Signs shall be of sufficient number and prominent location to convey the
message clearly and legibly.
(Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
 
523.04  ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Manager, or the department head having the authority to manage and
control any City-owned and occupied facility, or a designated agent of such
person, shall inform persons smoking in restricted areas that they are in
violation of the law.
(Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
 
523.05  OTHER PROHIBITIONS NOT AFFECTED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit smoking where it is
otherwise prohibited by law or regulation.
(Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
 
523.06  VIOLATION.
   The following acts constitute a violation of this chapter:
   (a)   Smoking in a posted no-smoking area;
   (b)   Willful destruction or defacement of a sign posted as required by
Section
523.03.
      (Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
 
523.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 93-58.  Passed 2-16-93.)
CHAPTER 525
Law Enforcement and Public Office
 
525.01   Definitions.
525.02   Falsification.
525.03   Impersonation of peace officer.
525.04   Compounding a crime.
525.05   Failure to report a crime, injury or knowledge of death.
525.06   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
525.07   Resisting arrest.
525.08   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
525.09   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
525.10   Dereliction of duty.
525.11   Interfering with civil rights.
525.12   Unauthorized display of law enforcement emblems on motor vehicles.
525.13   Giving false or fictitious information to enforcement agents; failure
to identify.
525.14   Assaulting police dog or horse or an assistance dog.
525.15   Refusal to disclose personal information in public place.
525.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Personating an officer to defraud - see Ohio R.C. 2913.44
Making false alarms - see Ohio R.C. 2917.32
Law enforcement officer defined - see GEN. OFF.
501.01(k)
Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
509.05
 
525.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Public official" means any elected or appointed officer, or employee,
or agent of the State or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a
temporary or permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to,
legislators, judges and law enforcement officers.  “Public official” does not
include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of
directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (b)   "Public servant" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any public official;
      (2)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including,
but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant;
      (3)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not the
person  is elected or appointed to the office for which the person is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this subsection if the
person has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to
public office, or if the person has filed a petition or petitions as required
by law to have the person’s name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or
special election, or if the person campaigns as a write-in candidate in any
primary, general or special election.  “Public servant” does not include an
employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of
the nonprofit corporation formed under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (c)   "Party official" means any person who holds an elective or appointive
post in a political party in the United States or this State, by virtue of
which the person directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting
party affairs at any level of responsibility.
   (d)   "Official proceeding" means any proceeding before a legislative,
judicial, administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to
take evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   (e)   "Detention" means arrest, confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest, confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of a crime in this State or another state or under
the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this State or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio
R.C. 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39 or 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation, except as provided in
this subsection, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures; that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person
on any type of release from a State correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this State
into this State by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B).  For a person confined
in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and
going to and from the work site.
   (f)   "Detention facility" means any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this State or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or unruly child in this State or another state or under the
laws of the United States.
   (g)   "Valuable thing or valuable benefit" includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution
was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
   (h)   "Campaign committee," "contribution," "political action committee,"
“legislative campaign fund” and "political party" have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   (i)   "Provider agreement" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5164.01.
      (ORC 2921.01)
      (Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
 
525.02  FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing the public official’s official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to that person’s detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (13)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in connection
with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery
sale.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under subsection (a)(6) hereof that the
oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (c)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of subsection (a)(1) to (8) or
(10) to (13) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(9) hereof is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 
   (e)   A person who violates this section is liable in a civil action to any
person harmed by the violation for injury, death, or loss to person or property
incurred as a result of the commission of the offense and for reasonable
attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred as a result of
prosecuting the civil action commenced under this section.  A civil action
under this section is not the exclusive remedy of a person who incurs injury,
death, or loss to person or property as a result of a violation of this
section.
(ORC 2921.13)
525.03  IMPERSONATION OF PEACE OFFICER.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Peace officer" means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable who is employed by a political subdivision of this State;
a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y), a State university law enforcement officer
appointed under Ohio R.C. 3345.04; a veterans' home police officer appointed
under Ohio R.C. 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority
under Ohio R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the State
or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom,
by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State highway patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the State or any of its political
subdivisions.
      (2)   "Private police officer" means any security guard, special police
officer, private detective or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.
      (3)   “Federal law enforcement officer” means an employee of the United
States who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the
investigation, apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted
of offenses under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (4)   “Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.
      (5)   "Impersonate" means to act the part of, assume the identity of,
wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of or display the identification of
a particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
 
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation.
 
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer, 
federal law enforcement officer, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
 
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the State or the
Municipality or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
 
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) hereof
that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose.
 
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  Whoever violates subsections (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the purpose of a violation of subsection
(d) hereof is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, such
violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2921.51)
 
525.04  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)    No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11 or 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, of which the actor under this
section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him as restitution for
the loss caused him by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under subsection (b) hereof, that abandonment or agreement in no way binds the
State or Municipality to abandoning the prosecution.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2921.21)
 
525.05  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME, INJURY OR KNOWLEDGE OF DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, no person,
knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to
report such information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of division (B) of Ohio R.C.
2913.04 has been, or is being committed or that the person has received
information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the
violation to law enforcement authorities.
 
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of subsection (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
 
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained.  For purposes of this subsection (c), “advanced practice registered
nurse” does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
 
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by subsection (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within the
person’s knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
 
   (e)   (1)   As used in this subsection, “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of superheated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by Ohio R.C. 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury that is inflicted by an
explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been
inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the
burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion
investigation, bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation, bureau, if there is a
bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or
treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under
subsection (e)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three
working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the
burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall comply
with the uniform standard developed by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3737.22(A)(15).
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under subsection (e)
of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions.  Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under subsection (e) of this section.
 
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege
or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground
for excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under subsection (f)(1) of this section, and the information may
be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
 
   (g)   Subsections (a) and (d) of this section do not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in
danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.05 or to victims of felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12.  As used in this
subsection, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
 
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
 
   (i)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime.  Violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of subsection (a)(2) or (b) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
 
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates subsection (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
 
   (l)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse. 
(ORC 2921.22) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
525.06  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when
such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2921.23)
525.07  RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest.  A
violation of subsection (a) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A
violation of subsection (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC
2921.33)
 
525.08  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of authorization
unless the contract was let by competitive bidding, to the lowest and best
bidder;
      (2)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the Municipality or governmental agency or
instrumentality with which the public official is connected;
      (3)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding if required by law, and that involves
more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that is
the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed five
percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due
that person as creditor does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total
indebtedness of the corporation or other organization;
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved,
an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates, has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved;
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the Municipality or governmental agency
or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established prior
to the public official's becoming associated with the Municipality or
governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
      (3)   The treatment accorded the Municipality or governmental agency or
instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that accorded other
customers or clients in similar transactions;
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full
knowledge by the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the public
official’s family or business associate, and the public official takes no part
in the deliberations or decisions of the Municipality or governmental agency or
instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Subsection (a)(4) does not prohibit participation by a public employee
in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public employee otherwise
qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or influence of the
public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from the program and
if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the public employee. 
Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public
contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipal corporation or an
official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint
assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable.  Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination, or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Public contract" means any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the State, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either, including
the employment of an individual by the State, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
      (2)   "Chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
(ORC 2921.42)
 
525.09  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than is allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), and (I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s
official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's
public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public
servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public
servant's public compensation;
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
 
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency;
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
 
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency;
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this Municipality for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
 
   (f)   Subsections (a), (b) and (c) hereof do not prohibit a person from
making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions. 
(ORC 2921.43)
525.10  DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay;
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
 
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary;
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention;
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another;
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape;
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
 
   (d)   No public official of the Municipality shall recklessly create a
deficiency, incur a liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by
the legislative authority of the Municipality for the use in any one year of
the department, agency or institution with which the public official is
connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes an officer or
employee of a contractor as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.08. 
525.11  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of his office, employment or authority,
shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to deprive any person of a
constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.45)
525.12  UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEMS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2913.441)
525.13  GIVING FALSE OR FICTITIOUS INFORMATION TO ENFORCEMENT AGENTS; FAILURE
TO IDENTIFY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly give, or assist in giving any false or
fictitious information relative to the name, address or date of birth of any
person to any law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his duties.
   (b)   No person shall upon request of any person known by him to be a law
enforcement officer, through identification, refuse to identify himself to such
officer if at the time of such request such officer is engaged in the
performance of his duties.
(Ord. 71-244.  Passed 12-28-71.)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
525.14  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR AN ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
 
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse.
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer’s duties
or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
 
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or
attempted.
      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an
assistance dog.
 
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is
being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the
following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.
 
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of assaulting a
police dog or horse.  If the violation results in physical harm to the police
dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the violation does not result in death, serious physical harm, or
physical harm to the police dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation results in death or serious
physical harm to the police dog or horse, such violation is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of harassing a
police dog or horse.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the
violation results in the death of the police dog or horse or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result
in its death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.  If the violation results in physical
harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in its death or in serious
physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of assaulting an
assistance dog.  If the violation results in physical harm to the dog other
than death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation does not result in death,
serious physical harm, or physical harm to the dog, assaulting an assistance
dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation results in death
or serious physical harm to the dog, such violation is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the
violation results in the death of or serious physical harm to the assistance
dog but does not result in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a felony
and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.  If the violation results
in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in its death or in
serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanction or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the Police Department regarding a violation of subsection
(a) or (b) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a
violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or
served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the police dog or horse
or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in
serious physical harm to that dog or horse to the extent that the dog or horse
needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of
replacing that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or
horse or a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind,
deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
 
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
 
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or
assistance dog.
 
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Physical harm" means any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (2)   "Police dog or horse" means a dog or horse that has been trained,
and may be used, to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      (3)   "Serious physical harm" means any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming;
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
      (4)   "Assistance dog”, "blind", and "mobility impaired person" have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
         (ORC 2921.321)
 
525.15  REFUSAL TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this State;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or to property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offense identified in subsection (a)(2)A. or B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
subsection (a)(2)A. or B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in subsection (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disclose one’s
personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 
   (c)   Nothing in this section requires a person to answer any questions
beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth.  Nothing in this section
authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for not providing any
information beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth or for
refusing to describe the offense observed.
 
   (d)   It is not a violation of this section to refuse to answer a question
that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is an element of the
crime that the person is suspected of committing.  (ORC 2921.29)
 
525.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 529
Liquor Control
 
529.01   Definitions.
529.02   Sales to and use by underage persons; securing public accommodations.
529.021   Purchase by minor; misrepresentation.
529.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
529.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle.
529.05   Permit required.
529.06   Low-alcohol beverages: sale to and purchase by underage persons
prohibited.
529.07   Open container prohibited.
529.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
529.09   Dancing and entertainment hours in liquor establishments.
529.10   False information by minors for employment.
529.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Prohibiting sale of intoxicating liquor on Sunday - see Ohio R.C. 4301.22(D)
Local option - see Ohio R.C. 4301.32 et seq., 4303.29
Disorderly conduct; intoxication - see GEN. OFF.
509.03
Using weapons while intoxicated - see Ohio R.C. 2923.15
 
529.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances:
   (a)   "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water
or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  Such
term excludes denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   "Intoxicating liquor" and "liquor" include all liquids and compounds,
other than beer as defined in subsection (c) hereof, containing one half of one
percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
“Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” include cider and alcohol and all solids and
confections which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume.
   (c)   (1)   "Beer" includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in
part from malt products and containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more,
but not more than twelve percent (12%) of alcohol by volume. 
         (ORC 4301.01)
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this chapter. 
(ORC 4301.244)
   (d)   "Person" includes firms and corporations.
   (e)   "Low-alcohol beverage” means any brewed or fermented malt product, or
any product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products, that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of
one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.  The beverages described in subsection
(e) hereof do not include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger
beer. 
      (ORC 4301.01) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
529.02  SALES TO AND USE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS; SECURING PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person,
or shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall
furnish it to, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the regular
line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person
or legal guardian.
   In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or no
employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a violation of this
subsection shall be charged, for the same offense, with a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4301.22(A)(1).
 
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian is present at
the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or intoxicating
liquor.
   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in
violation of this subsection that are committed by a lessee of that place,
unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions.
 
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when he knows or has reason to know either of the
following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person;
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a practitioner and has the drug of abuse
in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is twenty-one
years of age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
 
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the cost of,
attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating liquor, in
any public or private place.  No underage person shall knowingly be under the
influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place.  The
prohibitions set forth in this subsection (e) hereof against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian of a
minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Section
529.021(a) to (c).
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Drug of abuse" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (2)   "Hotel" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      (3)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs” and
“prescription” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (4)   “Minor” means a person under the age of eighteen years.
      (5)   "Underage person" means a person under the age of twenty-one years.
         (ORC 4301.69)
 
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  In addition, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof shall be fined not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).  (ORC 4301.99)
529.021 PURCHASE BY MINOR; MISREPRESENTATION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor.  (ORC 4301.63)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name,
age or other identification of any person under twenty-one years of age for the
purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under twenty-one years of age, by purchase, or as a gift. 
(ORC 4301.633)
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the person’s name, age or other identification for
the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in
any place where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by
the Division of Liquor Control or sold by the Division of Liquor Control. 
(ORC 4301.634)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no
other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof, shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (a) hereof may order
that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly
rate established by the court.  The court shall designate the time within which
the public work shall be completed.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first violation of that
subsection, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder’s
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and may
be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or the permit holder’s employee or agent a
false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), and may be sentenced to
a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  The court also may impose
a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified
in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit
holder’s employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  Except
as provided in this subsection, the court also may impose a class six
suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of twenty-one years.  The court, in
lieu of suspending the offenders temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform
a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform. 
(ORC 4301.99)
 
529.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)    No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. 
(ORC 4301.99)
529.04  LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in Section
529.07(d).  (ORC 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. 
   (c)   If an offender who violates this section was under the age of eighteen
years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties
it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary
instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license for a
period of not less than six months and not more than one year.  In lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license or driver’s license, the court may instead require the offender to
perform community service for a number of hours to be determined by the court. 
If the offender is fifteen years and six months of age or older and has not
been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a
period of six months.  If the offender has not attained the age of fifteen
years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of sixteen
years.  (ORC 4301.99)
529.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or employee shall
manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale, furnish or
sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating liquor in
this Municipality, or transport, import or cause to be transported or imported
any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol on or into this Municipality for
delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied with Ohio R.C.
Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control and in force at the time.  (ORC 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
529.06  LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES:  SALE TO AND PURCHASE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, "underage person" means a person under
eighteen years of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
Municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in
violation of this division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless
the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions.
   (h)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he is accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the low-
alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or
given for established religious purposes.
   (i)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section. 
(ORC 4301.631)
   (j)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).  The
court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (b) hereof may order that
the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate
established by the court.  The court shall designate the time within which the
public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99)
529.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Chauffeured limousine,” means a vehicle registered under Ohio R.C.
4503.24.
      (2)   "Street," "highway" and "motor vehicle" have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
 
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(1)E. hereof, in an agency
store;
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, on the premises of the
holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) hereof, while operating
or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) hereof, while being in
or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-2
(f), A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e,
D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j,  D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D8, E, F, F-
2, F-5, F-7 or F-8 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission.
         E.   Spirituous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued.  As used in this section, “music festival” means a series
of outdoor live musical performances, extending for a period of at least three
consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least forty acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in subsection (c)(3)A. of this section:
            1.   “Orchestral performance” means a concert comprised of a group
of not fewer than forty musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center” means an outdoor performing
arts center that is located on not less than one  hundred fifty acres of land
and that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day
of October of each year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in subsection (c)
(3)B.1. hereof if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending either of the following:
         A.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued;
         B.   An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance that
is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than
twenty-five other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit
premises.
         As used in subsection (c)(5) hereof, "orchestral performance" has the
same meaning as in subsection (c)(3)B. of this section.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility;
         B.   As used in subsection (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   “Racing event” means a motor vehicle racing event sanctioned
by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
            2.   “Outdoor motorsports facility” means an outdoor racetrack to
which all of the following apply:
               a.   It is two and four-tenths miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on two hundred acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under Ohio R.C. 4301.82, if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-
1c, A-2, A-2f, D class or F class permit holder to which both of the following
apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Subsection (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of
vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under
subsection (d) or (e) of this section.
         C.   As used in subsection (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the Division of Liquor Control about the event in
accordance with division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 4303.208.
         B.   As used in subsection (c)(8) of this section, market means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
 
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for the use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a
prearranged contract, or the guest of such a person, when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine;
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located;
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
 
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises.  The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
subsection (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver. 
 
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
subsection (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either thirty-six ounces of beer or eighteen ounces of wine.
      (2)   The legislative authority of a municipal corporation or township
may enact an ordinance or adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a
passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened
container or beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
 
   (g)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      As used in subsection (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
      (1)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
fifty percent of which are retail food establishments or food service
operations licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3717;
      (2)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than twenty-two thousand
square feet;
      (3)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
         (ORC 4301.62)
         (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
529.08  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This rule shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1c, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of one a.m. and five
thirty a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of one a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
 
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquid shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G,  D-5I, D-5J, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of two thirty a.m. and
five thirty a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of two thirty a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in subsection
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to five thirty a.m.  (OAC 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
529.09  DANCING AND ENTERTAINMENT HOURS IN LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall permit or allow on or within any place where beer,
wine, spiritous liquor, alcohol or other intoxicating liquor is sold or offered
for sale within the City any person or persons to dance therein between the
hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or
Saturday of any week, or between the hours of 2:30 a.m. on Sunday morning and
5:00 a.m. on Monday of any week.
   (b)   No person shall permit or allow on or within any place where beer,
wine, spiritous liquor, alcohol or other intoxicating liquor is sold or offered
for sale within the City any vocal or instrumental music or any other form of
entertainment therein between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day
of any week.
(Ord. 3985.  Passed 8-26-40.)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
529.10  FALSE INFORMATION BY MINORS FOR EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   No person under the age of eighteen years shall knowingly give false
information concerning his or her age for the purpose of securing employment to
handle beer in any manner whatsoever in any establishment in the City where
beer is sold under and by virtue of a permit as issued by the State of Ohio,
Department of Liquor Control.
   (b)   No person under the age of twenty-one shall knowingly give false
information concerning his or her age for the purpose of securing employment to
handle intoxicating liquor in any manner whatsoever in any establishment in the
City where intoxicating liquor is sold under and by virtue of a permit as
issued by the State of Ohio, Department of Liquor Control.
(Ord. 5083.  Passed 11-6-50.)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
529.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 533
Obscenity and Sex Offenses
 
533.01   Definitions.
533.02   Presumption of knowledge; actual notice and defense.
533.03   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
533.04   Pandering obscenity.
533.05   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
533.06   Pandering material involving a minor; illegal use of minor.
533.07   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
533.08   Unlawful advertising of massage.
533.09   Dissemination of private sexual images.
533.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Criminal trespass - see Ohio R.C. 2911.21
Telephone harassment - see Ohio R.C. 2917.21
Complicity - see GEN. OFF.
501.10
Offensive conduct - see GEN. OFF.
509.03
 
533.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Sexual conduct" means vaginal intercourse between a male and female;
anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex;
and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of
the body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (b)   "Sexual contact" means any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
such person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (c)   "Sexual activity" means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (d)   "Prostitute" means a male or female who promiscuously engages in
sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the
prostitute or to another.
   (e)   “Harmful to juveniles” means that quality of any material or
performance describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   (f)   When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to such group, any material or
performance is "obscene" if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way which tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way which
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose;
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   (g)   "Sexual excitement" means the condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (h)   "Nudity" means the showing, representation or depiction of human male
or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (i)   "Juvenile" means an unmarried person under the age of eighteen.
   (j)   "Material" means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster,
print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic
record, or tape, or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through
sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or text appearing on a computer
monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display, or similar display device
or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk,
compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data storage device.
   (k)   "Performance" means any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show,
skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (l)   "Spouse" means a person married to an offender at the time of an
alleged offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse
when any of the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
authorized by Ohio R.C. 3103.06;
      (2)   During the pendency of an action between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation;
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
   (m)   "Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen years.
   (n)   “Mental health client or patient” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.51.
   (o)   “Mental health professional” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.115.
   (p)   “Sado-masochistic abuse” means flagellation or torture by or upon a
person or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained.
      (ORC 2907.01)
 
533.02  PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE; ACTUAL NOTICE AND DEFENSE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling materials or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by Section
533.03, is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved, if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction in which the person to
whom the notice is directed does business.  Such notice, regardless of the
manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the material
or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to juveniles
and bear the date of such notice.
   (c)   Section
533.03 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of a
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   Sections
533.03,
533.05(a) and
533.07 do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Subsection (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of Section
533.03,
533.05 or
533.07, or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that
nature.
      (3)   Subsection (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of Section
533.03,
533.05 or
533.07, and that contains content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of Section
533.03,
533.05, or
533.07 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under Section
533.03 or
533.07 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
another electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
   (g)   If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision
of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related
sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.  To this end, the provisions are severable.
(ORC 2907.35)
533.03  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section,
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by the juvenile’s parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or the defendant’s agent or
employee a draft card, driver's license, birth certificate, marriage license,
or other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was eighteen years of age or over or married, and the person to whom
that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe
that the juvenile was under the age of eighteen and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) hereof, mistake of age is
not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision
of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related
sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.  To this end, the provisions are severable.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the material or performance
involved is obscene, a violation of this section is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2907.31)
533.04  PANDERING OBSCENITY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Section
533.04, which was derived from Ohio R.C. 2907.32 is no longer included in the
Codified Ordinances.  By Amended Substitute Senate Bill 2, effective July 1,
1996, the Ohio General Assembly classified all violations of pandering
obscenity as felonies.  Therefore each charge of pandering obscenity should now
be filed under Ohio R.C. 2907.32.)
 
533.05  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he is the parent, guardian or spouse of such
juvenile;
      (2)   Furnish such juvenile with any identification or document
purporting to show that such juvenile is eighteen years of age or over or
married.
 
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he is eighteen years of age or over or
married;
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
is eighteen years of age or over or married.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile who
violates subsection (b) hereof shall be adjudged an unruly child, with such
disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151. 
(ORC 2907.33)
 
533.06  PANDERING MATERIAL INVOLVING A MINOR; ILLEGAL USE OF MINOR.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Section
533.06, which was derived from Ohio R.C. 2907.322 and 2907.323 is no longer
included in the Codified Ordinances.  By Amended Substitute Senate Bill 2,
effective July 1, 1996, the Ohio General Assembly classified all violations of
pandering material involving a minor and illegal use of a minor as felonies. 
Therefore each charge of pandering material involving a minor or illegal use of
a minor should now be filed under Ohio R.C. 2907.322 or 2907.323.)
533.07  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of subsection (a) hereof if the material in
question is displayed by placing it behind "blinder racks" or similar devices
that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in
question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in
question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to
juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(ORC 2907.311)
533.08  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the legislative authority of a
municipal corporation or township from enacting any regulation of the
advertising of massage further than and in addition to the provisions of
subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
(ORC 2927.17)
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual activity” has the same meaning as in
subsection (c) of
533.01.
533.09  DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Disseminate” means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (2)   “Image” means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (3)   “Interactive computer service” has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996", 47 U.S.C. 230, as amended.
      (4)   “Internet provider” means a provider of internet service, including
all of the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the federal
communications commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunication service, both as defined
in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996" 47 U.S.C. 153, as amended.
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4927.01.
      (5)   “Mobile service” and “telecommunications carrier” have the meanings
defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as amended.
      (6)   “Cable service provider” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1332.01.
      (7)   “Direct-to-home satellite service” has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. 303, as amended.
      (8)   “Video service provider” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1332.21.
      (9)   “Sexual act” means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
   
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is eighteen years of age or older;
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act;
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image;
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose;
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the General Offenses Code, or the Revised Code may be prosecuted under this
section, the other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f)(1)B., C., or
D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of nonconsensual
dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section, nonconsensual dissemination of private
sexual images is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, nonconsensual dissemination
of private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under eighteen years of age and the person in
the image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender
shall not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in Ohio R.C. 2307.66.
(ORC 2917.211)
533.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 537
Offenses Against Persons
 
537.01   Domestic violence.
537.02   Temporary protection order.
537.03   Illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
537.04   Criminal child enticement.
537.05   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child.
537.06   Culpability of parent for delinquent act of child.
537.07   Menacing by stalking.
537.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Physical harm to persons defined - see GEN. OFF.
501.01 (c), (e)
Fighting; provoking violent response - see GEN. OFF.
509.03
 
537.01  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (c)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) to (5)  of this
section, a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree, and a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(4) of this section,
if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially similar to
domestic violence, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12,
2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially similar to any of those sections if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family
or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation
of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (c) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in subsection (d)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) or (4) of this
section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section
is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law, and a
violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in connection
with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person violated
this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Family or household member" means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse or a former spouse of
the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent, or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender; or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the
offender.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other
natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      (2)   "Person living as a spouse" means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.  (ORC 2919.25)
   (g)   The same relief available under the Ohio Revised Code for filing a
complaint for violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.25 shall be available for filing a
complaint for violation of this section.
537.02  TEMPORARY PROTECTION ORDER.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2919.26 or 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.213
or 2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section,
violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to
or been adjudicated a delinquent child for a violation of a protection order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214, two or more
violations of Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or 2911.211 that involved
the same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent
agreement, or one or more violations of this section, violating a protection
order is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court.  If the court requires under this
subsection that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the court
determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount
allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under Ohio R.C.
2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and
the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of
funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2743.191.  The
total amount paid from the reparations fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2743.191 for electronic monitoring under this section and Ohio R.C. 2151.34 and
2903.214 shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars per year.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3) of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this
State or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265
(c).
   
   (d)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person, including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order
of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection.  “Protection order issued by a court of another state” does not
include an order for support or for custody of a child.  (ORC 2919.27)
537.03  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATE NICOTINE PRODUCTS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Age verification” means a service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is eighteen years of age
or older.
      (2)   A.   “Alternative nicotine product” means, subject to subsection
(a)(2)B. of this section, an electronic cigarette or any other product or
device that consists of or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body
by any means, including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing,
dissolving or inhaling.
         B.   “Alternative nicotine product” does not include any of the
following:
            1.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
            2.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. 321(g)(1);
            3.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. 321(h);
            4.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in 21
U.S.C. 353(g).
      (3)   “Child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      (4)   “Cigarette” includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
      (5)   “Distribute” means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
      (6)   A.   “Electronic cigarette” means, subject to subsection (a)(6)B.
of this section, any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that
delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device
to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to  or purchased by
consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or
electronic pipe.
         B.   “Electronic cigarette” does not include any item, product or
device described in subsections (a)(2)B.1. to 4. of this section.
      (7)   “Proof of age” means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is eighteen
years of age or older.
      (8)   “Tobacco product” means any product that is made from tobacco,
including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco or snuff.
      (9)   “Vending machine” has the same meaning as “coin machine” in Ohio
R.C. 2913.01.
   (b)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any child;
      (2)   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in any place
that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that giving,
selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person
under eighteen years of age is prohibited by law;
      (3)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age or
other identification of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes for that child;
      (4)   Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than twenty cigarettes or any package
of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of
tobacco;
      (5)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
      (6)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine products,
papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than cigarettes over
the internet or through another remote method without age verification.
   (c)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
      (1)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not open
to the general public;
      (2)   An area to which children are not generally permitted access;
      (3)   Any other place not identified in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this
section, upon all of the following conditions:
         A.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person.  For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway or
outer-waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
         B.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place
is closed.
   (d)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection
(b)(1) of this section:
      (1)   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is eighteen years
of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
      (2)   The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a
child under subsection (b)(1) of this section is a parent, spouse who is
eighteen  years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
   (e)   It is not a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section for
a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes while
the child is participating in a research protocol if all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has consented
in writing to the child participating in the research protocol;
      (2)   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol;
      (3)   The child is participating in the research protocol at the facility
or location specified in the research protocol.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (c)
of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products.  Except as otherwise provided in
this subsection, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (b)(1),
(2), (4), (5) or (6) or (c) of this section, illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, permitting
children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section, permitting
children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (g)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold or otherwise distributed
to a child in violation of this section and that are used, possessed, purchased
or received by a child in violation of Ohio R.C. 2151.87 are subject to seizure
and forfeiture as contraband under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
(ORC 2927.02)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
537.04  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
   (a)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice or lure any child under fourteen years of age
to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle, or
onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity;
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of any Board of
Education, or the actor is any of such persons, but, at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the
actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.
 
   (b)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a) of
this section.
 
   (c)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to,
that proscribed by subsection (a) of this section, shall engage in any activity
described in subsection (a) of this section.
 
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a) hereof
that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide emergency
situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable belief that
it was necessary to preserve the health, safety or welfare of the child.
 
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child enticement,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender has previously been
convicted of a violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2905.05, 2907.02, or
2907.03, or former Section 2907.12, or Ohio R.C. 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the
victim of that prior offense was under seventeen years of age at the time of
the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 
 
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
      (2)   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Vessel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
         (ORC 2905.05) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
537.05  CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Delinquent child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
      (2)   “Unruly child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.022.
 
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under Ohio R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a
new residence address, and periodically verify a residence address and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under Ohio R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense. 
(ORC 2919.24) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
537.06  CULPABILITY OF PARENT FOR DELINQUENT ACT OF CHILD.
   (a)   No parent of a child under the age of eighteen years, having the
custody and control of such child, shall by any act or conduct, or by failure
to exercise reasonable parental control and discipline of such child, aid,
abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to any act of delinquency on the
part of such child.
   As used in this section, "act of delinquency" means any act or conduct, by
any person, which violates any law of the United States, the State of Ohio, or
any ordinance or regulation of a political subdivision of such State and which
constitutes a crime if committed by a person eighteen years of age or older;
which act or conduct is done or engaged in subsequent to a final determination
by a court of competent jurisdiction, in a proceeding or prosecution to which
such person was a party, that such person had done any such act or had engaged
in any such conduct.
(Ord. 71-31.  Passed 2-16-71.)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
537.07  MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   (1)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person.  In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member or mental distress to the other person or
the other person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or
mental distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are
directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that
employs the other person or to which the other person belongs.
      (2)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication or
any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but not
limited to, any computer, computer network, computer program, computer system
or telecommunication device shall post a message or use any intentionally
written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of the following:
         A.   Violate subsection (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of subsection (a)(1)
of this section.
      (3)   No person, with sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a)(1)
or (2) of this section.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by stalking.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)(2) and (3) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Menacing by stalking is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law if any of the following applies:
         A.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section or a violation of Section
541.06.
         B.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or against the
victim, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)(2) or (3)
of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message made a
threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
         C.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where the victim
lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense committed
under subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the victim
lives, is employed, or attends school.
         D.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
         E.   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or any
other person or a history of other violent acts toward the victim or any other
person.
         F.   While committing the offense under subsection (a)(1) of this
section or a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is based on conduct
in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control. 
Subsection (b)(2)F. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section or a violation of
subsection (a)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of subsection
(a)(1) of this section.
         G.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         H.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the premises at
which the victim resides, to the real property on which that premises is
located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or as a result
of an offense committed under subsection (a)(2) of this section, or an offense
committed under subsection (a)(3) of this section based on a violation of
subsection (a)(2) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that real
property, or any personal property on that premises.
         I.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined
to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by
evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-
recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and
serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that
prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency
or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities, or duties, menacing by stalking is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Pattern of conduct” means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization.  Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct”.
      (2)   “Mental distress” means any of the following:
         A.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
         B.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (4)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (5)   “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
      (6)   “Computer”, “computer network”, “computer program”, “computer
system” and “telecommunications device” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2913.01.
      (7)   “Post a message” means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communication, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
      (8)   “Third person” means, in relation to conduct as described in
subsection (a)(2) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender
nor the victim of the conduct.
      (9)   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
      (10)   “Organization” includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
      (11)   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the person;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against whom
the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      (12)   “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
   (e)   The Municipality does not need to prove in a prosecution under this
section that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to show that
the person was caused mental distress as described in subsection (d)(2)B. of
this section.
   (f)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection.  In addition, any
person providingaccess or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or
will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Subsection (f)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as
otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   Subsection (f)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.  (ORC 2903.211)
537.08  TELECOMMUNICATION HARASSMENT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse, any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any person at those premises.
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten or harass the
recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunication
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of subsections (a)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8),
(9), (10), or (11) or (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense.  Each subsequent offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense.  For each subsequent
offense or if a violation of subsection (a)(4) hereof results in economic harm
of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, a violation of subsection (a)(4)
hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this State against
any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information
service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunication
service, interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of
the United States Code, or information service, for any injury, death, or loss
to person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.  A
provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information
service, or an officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service,
interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the
United States Code, of information service, is immune from any civil or
criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s
provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the
terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or
prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection.  In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electric method of remotely
transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be liable
for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as
otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, shall neither be treated
as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information
content provider, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States
Code, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or development of
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in
Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code.  Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the
person developed or created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Subsections (a)(5) to (11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing or disseminating information for the general public, within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Economic harm” means all direct, incidental, and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct.  “Economic
harm” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      A.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
      C.   The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
      D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (2)   “Caller” means the person described in subsection (a) hereof who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   “Telecommunication” and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (4)   “Sexual activity” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
      (5)   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3..   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the recipient, or anther person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (6)   “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (7)   “Cable operator” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1332.21.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication call to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 91 Stat. 874 (1977), 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or
the “Telephone Consumer Protection Act”, 105 Stat. 2395 (1991), 47 U.S.C. 227,
as amended.  (ORC 2917.21)
537.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 541
Property Offenses
 
541.01   Determining property value in arson.
541.02   Criminal damaging or endangering.
541.03   Criminal mischief.
541.04   Destruction of shrubs, trees or crops.
541.05   Ethnic intimidation.
541.06   Aggravated trespass.
541.07   Defacing public property prohibited; litter control.
541.08   Vehicular vandalism.
541.09   Trespass on a place of public amusement.
541.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
Physical harm to property defined - see GEN. OFF.
501.01(d), (f)
Damage to sidewalks - see GEN. OFF.
521.04
 
541.01  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of Section
541.02.
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) hereof, and
the physical harm is such that the property can be restored substantially to
its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is the reasonable
cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) hereof, and
the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored substantially to
its former condition, the value of the property, in the case of personal
property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind
and quality, and in the case of real property or real property fixtures, is the
difference in the fair market value of the property immediately before and
immediately after the offense.
 
   (b)   As used in this section, "fair market value" has the same meaning as
in Section
545.02(c)(3).
 
   (c)    Prima-facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Section
545.02(d) may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(ORC 2909.11)
 
541.02  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING.
   (a)   No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without his consent:
      (1)   Knowingly, by any means;
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison,
radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently
dangerous agency or substance.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging or
endangering, a misdemeanor if the property involved is not an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or
implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if
the violation does not create a risk of physical harm to any person, and if the
property involved is not an occupied aircraft.  A violation of this section is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If violation of this section creates a
risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC 2909.06)
(Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
541.03  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with the property of another;
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker.
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that
is on that land.
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, all as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.01, knowingly
do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
 
   (b)   As used in this section, "safety device" means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of
danger, or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or
any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving
the safety of persons or property.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in subsection (c)(2) or (3) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.  Except as otherwise provided in
this subsection, if the violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of
this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the property involved in the
violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is an
aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel,
lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or
intended to be carried in an aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation
of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation
of subsection (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from
the violation is one thousand dollars or more, or if the computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved
in the violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is used or intended to be
used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates a risk of
physical harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of
subsection (a)(6) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
         (ORC 2909.07)
541.04  DESTRUCTION OF SHRUBS, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to any penalty provided, whoever violates this section is
liable in treble damages for the injury caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 901.99(A))
541.05  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, 2909.07
or 2917.21(A)(3) to (5) or Sections
541.02 or
541.03 of the General Offenses Code by reason of the race, color, religion,
national origin, or sexual orientation of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. 
Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense
the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation.
(ORC 2927.12) (Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
541.06  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2911.211)
541.07  DEFACING PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED; LITTER CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall paint, mark, or write on, or post or otherwise affix
any handbills, signs, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures, or any
advertising to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street
lamppost, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake, or guard, railroad trestle,
electric light or power or communication line pole or related appurtenance, or
upon any traffic signal installation, or upon any lighting system, public
bridge, drinking fountain, lifesaving equipment, street sign or traffic sign or
refuse receptacle located on real property owned by the City, nor upon any
other real or personal property owned by the City without first obtaining a
written permission from the City Manager.
   (b)   No person shall maliciously or willfully deface, injure, mutilate,
mar, destroy, besmear, or bedaub or aid in defacing, injuring, mutilating,
marring, destroying, besmearing, or bedaubing any City owned real or personal
property.
   (c)   No person shall distribute handbills, signs, circulars, dodger,
pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising matter, of any kind whatsoever,
by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle standing or parked in the
public streets of the City.
   (d)   Nothing contained in this section shall apply to improvements
permitted under Chapter
903 of the Codified Ordinances.
   
   (e)   Any handbills, signs, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures,
or any advertising matter found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any public
property or motor vehicle contrary to the provisions of this section may be
removed by the City.
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a metal
plaque or plate, or individual letters or figures in a sidewalk commemorating a
historical, cultural, or artistic event, location or personality for which the
City Manager or the City Commission has granted permission in writing.
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the painting of house numbers
on the curb in front of the building to which the number pertains.
   (h)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from posting a sign,
on a wooden stake, wire wicket, or other appropriate structure, advertising an
event which will occur over a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours;
provided, such sign is removed at the conclusion of the event advertised.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord.  97-410.  Passed 11-25-97.)
541.08  VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Highway” means any highway as defined in Section
301.42 of the Traffic Code or any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or
overpass.
      (2)   “Alley”, “street”, and “vehicle” have the same meanings as in
Chapter
301 of the Traffic Code.
      (3)   “Vessel” and “waters in this State” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
 
   (b)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
      (1)   Any vehicle on a highway;
      (2)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this State that are
located in the Municipality.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular vandalism. 
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular vandalism is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation of this section creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, serious physical harm to
property, physical harm to any person or serious physical harm to any person,
vehicular vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State
law. 
(ORC 2909.09) (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
541.09  TRESPASS ON A PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section, “place of public amusement” means a stadium,
theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain
on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a result of
that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement after a
printed written notice has been given as provided in subsection (d)(1) of this
section that the general public is restricted from access to that restricted
portion of the place of public amusement.  A restricted portion of a place of
public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field, an
athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
   (c)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement.  This
subsection does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of
force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public
amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or
participant at a place of public amusement.
   (d)   (1)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted from
access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written notice
of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement.  If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this subsection,
regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting
or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
         A.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in writing,
that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is restricted;
         B.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the public
place of amusement is restricted.
      (2)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in subsection (d)(1) of this section,
the Municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of subsection (b)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty, or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than thirty and not more than one hundred twenty hours of supervised
community service work.  (ORC 2911.23)
541.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
CHAPTER 543
Registration of Felons
 
543.01   Registration by persons convicted of certain offenses.
543.02   Registration when ordinance becomes effective.
543.03   Photograph and fingerprints required.
543.04   Notice of change of address.
543.05   Failure to report; providing false information.
543.06   Permanent records; disclosure of information.
543.07   Pardoned persons exempt.
543.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Division of Police - see ADM.
139.04
Carrying concealed weapons - see Ohio R.C. 2923.12
Giving false or fictitious information to enforcement agents - see GEN. OFF.
525.13
 
543.01  REGISTRATION BY PERSONS CONVICTED OF CERTAIN OFFENSES.
   Every person who in any court of the United States, or in any court of any
of the states, within a period of ten years past, shall have pleaded guilty to,
or been convicted of, any of the crimes of murder, manslaughter, rape, maiming,
shooting with intent to kill or wound, cutting with intent to kill or wound,
assault with intent to kill or to commit robbery or rape, kidnapping, robbery,
arson, burglary, breaking and entering in the daytime, grand larceny, pocket
picking, embezzlement, blackmailing, extortion, malicious destruction of
property, forgery, uttering a forged instrument, obtaining money or property by
false pretenses, carrying concealed weapons, receiving stolen property,
counterfeiting, bribery, perjury, conspiracy, using mails to defraud, or
transportation of females for immoral purposes, who comes within the corporate
limits of the City from any point outside thereof, whether in transit through
the City or not, shall report to the Chief of Police within forty-eight hours
after his or her arrival within the corporate limits, and shall furnish to the
Chief of Police a written statement signed by such person containing the true
name of such person and each other name or alias by which such person is or has
been known, a full and complete description of such person, the name of each of
the crimes hereinbefore enumerated of which he shall have been convicted or to
which he shall have pleaded guilty, together with the title of the court
wherein such proceedings occurred and the location of such court, the name
under which he was there charged, and the date of such plea or conviction, the
name and location of any and each prison, reformatory or other penal
institutions in which he shall have been confined upon sentence therefor,
together with the address of his residence, stopping place or living quarters
within the City, if any, or the address or location of his intended residence,
stopping place or living quarters and each thereof, and the length of time for
which he intends to remain or reside within the City.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.02  REGISTRATION WHEN ORDINANCE BECOMES EFFECTIVE.
   Every person who shall be within the corporate limits of the City at the
time when Ordinance 3476, passed November 20, 1933, became effective, who has
pleaded guilty to or been convicted of, any of the crimes enumerated in Section
543.01, in any of the courts and within the period therein mentioned, shall,
within forty-eight hours from and after the effective date of such ordinance,
furnish to the Chief of Police a statement prescribed and required by Section
543.01.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.03  PHOTOGRAPH AND FINGERPRINTS REQUIRED.
   At the time of furnishing the information required by Sections
543.01 or
543.02 by any person, the Chief of Police shall cause such person to be
photographed and a record of his fingerprints to be made, which photograph and
record shall be made a part of the permanent record provided for by this
chapter.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.04  NOTICE OF CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
   In the event that any person specified in Section
543.01 or
543.02 shall change any place of residence, stopping place or living quarters
to any new or different place or places, or establish any new place or places
of residence or stopping place or living quarters within the City, other than
those shown by his previous report or reports to the Chief of Police, he shall
within twenty-four hours thereafter notify the Chief of Police in writing
signed by him, of such change of address, and shall furnish in such written
statement the address of each and additional places of residences, stopping
places or living quarters.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.05  FAILURE TO REPORT; PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION.
   No person, required by any of the provisions of this chapter to furnish any
report or information, shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with each and
all of the terms of this chapter, or make any false or fictitious statement
with respect to any fact required to be included in such report or statement.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.06  PERMANENT RECORDS; DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.
   The Chief of Police shall cause to be made a permanent record of all
information including photographs and fingerprints required by the provisions
of this chapter to be furnished to or by him, and shall forthwith furnish a
copy of any part or all thereof to any duly constituted and acting officer of
the City, Clark County, the State of Ohio or the United States, charged with
the duty of prosecuting offenders.  Such record shall at all times be open to
the inspection of any officer charged with the enforcement of the laws having
jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the City, but no portion thereof
shall be open to the inspection of others, except when in the opinion of the
Chief of Police the same shall be necessary in the administration of the law.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.07  PARDONED PERSONS EXEMPT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person
who shall have received a full pardon for each crime with respect to which he
would otherwise be required by the terms of this chapter to furnish a report or
statement.
(Ord. 3476.  Passed 11-20-33.)
 
543.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  Each separate day during which any violation continues, and
each failure, neglect or refusal to comply therewith in any respect shall be
deemed to constitute a separate violation thereof, and shall be punishable
accordingly.
 
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 545
Theft and Fraud
 
545.01   Definitions.
545.02   Determining property value in theft offense.
545.03   Property exceptions as felony offense.
545.04   Detention of shoplifters; rights of museums and libraries.
545.05   Tampering with and theft of utilities.
545.06   Misrepresentations in eyeglass advertisements.
545.07   Vehicle trespass.
545.08   Forgery of identification cards.
545.09   Identity fraud.
545.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Property defined - see GEN. OFF.
501.01(j)
Cheating - see GEN. OFF.
517.05
Falsification - see GEN. OFF.
525.02
Impersonating a public servant - see GEN. OFF.
525.03
 
545.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context requires that a term be given a
different meaning:
   (a)   "Deception" means knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be
deceived, by any false or misleading representation, by withholding
information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other
conduct, act or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false
impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
   (b)   "Defraud" means to knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for
oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to
another.
   (c)   "Deprive" means to do any of the following:
      (1)   Withhold property of another permanently, or for such period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will
recover it;
      (3)   Accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (d)   "Owner" means, unless the context requires a different meaning, any
person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or
control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even
though the ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   (e)   "Services" include labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services, including wireless service as defined
in Ohio R.C. 5507.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services.
   (f)   "Writing" means any computer software, document, letter, memorandum,
note, paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written,
typewritten or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or
identification.
   (g)   "Forge" means to fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any
means any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   (h)   "Utter" means to issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver or display.
   (i)   "Coin machine" means any mechanical or electronic device designed to
do both of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin, bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   (j)   "Slug" means an object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition
or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine
as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that
purpose.
   (k)   "Theft offense" means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12,
2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42 to 2913.45,
2913.47, 2913.48, 2913.51, 2915.05, 2915.06, or 2921.41.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in subsection (k)(1) hereof or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.41,
2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under subsection (k)(1), (2) or (3) hereof.
   (l)   "Computer services" includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (m)   "Computer" means an electronic device that performs logical,
arithmetic and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic
impulses.  "Computer" includes, but is not limited to, all input, output,
processing, storage, computer program or communication facilities that are
connected or related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device
of that nature.
   (n)   "Computer system" means a computer and related devices, whether
connected or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and
storage devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that
make the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (o)   "Computer network" means a set of related and remotely connected
computers and communication facilities that includes more than one computer
system that has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and
communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (p)   "Computer program" means an ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that when executed by a computer cause the computer
to process data.
   (q)   "Computer software" means computer programs, procedures and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (r)   "Data" means a representation of information, knowledge, facts,
concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized
manner and that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer
network.  For purposes of Section
545.07, "data" has the additional meaning set forth in subsection (a) of that
section.
   (s)   "Cable television service" means any services provided by or through
the facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (t)   "Gain access" means to approach, instruct, communicate with, store
data in, retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a
computer, computer system or computer network.
   (u)   "Credit card" includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or
other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a
cash dispensing machine.
   (v)   "Electronic fund transfer" has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C.A. 1693a, as amended.
   (w)   “Rented property” means personal property in which the right of
possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate
term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property, within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration generally is determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (x)   “Telecommunication” means the origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence of intelligence or any nature over any
communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or analog method.
   (y)   “Telecommunications device” means any instrument, equipment, machine,
or other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited
to, a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (z)   “Telecommunications service” means the providing, allowing,
facilitating, or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of
a telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (aa)   “Counterfeit telecommunications device” means a telecommunications
device that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service.  “Counterfeit
telecommunications device” includes, but is not limited to, a clone telephone,
clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning
device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating
the use of telecommunications service or information service without immediate
detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or
capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless
telephone.
   (bb)   (1)   “Information service” means, subject to subsection (bb)(2)
hereof, the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing,
transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available
information via telecommunications, including, but not limited to, electronic
publishing.
      (2)   “Information service” does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in subsection (bb)(1) hereof for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (cc)   “Elderly person” means a person who is sixty-five years of age or
older.
   (dd)   “Disabled adult” means a person who is eighteen years of age or older
and has some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unfit to work at
any substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be
able to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a
period of at least twelve months without any present indication of recovery
from the impairment, or who is eighteen years of age or older and has been
certified as permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this State or the
United States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (ee)   “Firearm” and “dangerous ordnance” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2923.11.
   (ff)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (gg)   “Dangerous drug” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (hh)   “Drug abuse offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (ii)   “Police dog or horse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.321.
   (jj)   “Anhydrous ammonia” is a compound formed by the combination of two
gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described in this
subsection.  Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen
(NH3).  Anhydrous ammonia by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts
hydrogen, which is approximately eighty-two per cent nitrogen to eighteen per
cent hydrogen.
   (kk)   “Assistance dog” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
   (ll)   “Active duty service member” means any member of the armed forces of
the United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States
Code.
      (ORC 2913.01)
 
545.02  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or service is involved in a theft
offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value is the aggregate value of all property or services
involved in the offense.
 
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a series
of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate,
or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, 2913.21
(B)(1) or (2) or 2913.43 or 2913.31 involving a victim who is an elderly person
or disabled adult, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense.  When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C.
2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of,
conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.02 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be
tried as a single offense.  The value of the property or services involved in
the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value is the
aggregate value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the
series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, 2913.21(B)(1) or (2) or 2913.43 or 2913.31, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is
an elderly person or disabled adult, pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct,
all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If the offender is
being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit
a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio
R.C. 2913.02 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of
those offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as
a single offense, the value of the property or services involved for the
purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   In prosecuting a single offense under subsection (b)(1) or (2), it
is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series. 
Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender, within a given
span of time, committed one or more theft offenses in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in subsection (b)
(1) of this section or that involve a common course of conduct to defraud
multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in subsection
(b)(2) of this section.  While it is not necessary to separately allege and
prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under
subsection (b)(1) or (2) hereof, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a
single offense to prove the aggregate value of the property or services in
order to meet the requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
 
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount that would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under subsection (c)(1) hereof, and which retains substantial utility for its
purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing the
property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under subsections (c)(1) or (2) hereof, and the value of services, is the fair
market value of the property or services.  As used in this section, "fair
market value" is the money consideration that a buyer would give and a seller
would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to
buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all
facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to
act.
 
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence that may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is
prima-facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest market quotation prior to the offense, is prima-facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima-facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services that may be received by the
instrument, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima-facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting ina
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima-facie evidence of the value of the
services. 
(ORC 2913.61)
545.03  PROPERTY EXCEPTIONS AS FELONY OFFENSE.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender has previously been convicted of a theft offense, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 2913.02 or 2913.51 do not apply if the property involved is any of
the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, which on
its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or
identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and which has not been
executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A firearm or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section
549.01;
   (d)   A motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or the proceeds of a
motor vehicle insurance policy;
   (e)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by Ohio
R.C. 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed
by Ohio R.C. 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard or sticker as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (f)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
   (g)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01(A).
      (ORC 2913.71)
545.04  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS; RIGHTS OF MUSEUMS AND LIBRARIES.
   (a)   A merchant, or his employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that items offered for sale by a mercantile establishment have been
unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (c)
hereof, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
 
   (b)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (c) hereof or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) hereof, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has
either:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
 
   (c)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to subsection (b) hereof or a merchant or his employee or
agent pursuant to subsection (a) hereof may detain another person for any of
the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest.
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this General Offenses or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a
pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution or merchant.
   (d)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, or the merchant or his employee or agent acting under subsection
(a) or (b) hereof shall not search the person, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person's consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (e)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that he has
probable cause to believe has committed any act described in subsection (b)(1)
or (2) hereof or that he has probable cause to believe has committed an
unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment.  An arrest under this subsection
shall be made within a reasonable time after the commission of the act or
unlawful taking.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Archival institution" means any public or private building,
structure or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices,
records, manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical materials
are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to
disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the
materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons
who have a particular interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the
materials.
      (2)   "Museum" means any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (3)   “Pretrial diversion program” means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this State.  (ORC 2935.041)
 
545.05  TAMPERING WITH AND THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, without the utility's consent, with intent
to violate subsection (b) hereof:
      (1)   Tamper with a gas, electric, steam or water meter, conduit or
attachment of a utility;
      (2)   Reconnect a gas, electric, steam or water meter, conduit or
attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility.
   In a prosecution under subsection (a)(1) hereof, proof that a meter, conduit
or attachment of a utility has been tampered with is prima-facie evidence that
the person who is obligated to pay for the service rendered through the meter,
conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or control of the meter,
conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred, has caused the
tampering with intent to violate subsection (b) hereof.
   In a prosecution under subsection (a)(2) hereof, proof that a meter, conduit
or attachment disconnected by a utility has been reconnected without the
consent of the utility is prima-facie evidence that the person in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time of the reconnection has
reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment with intent to violate subsection
(b) hereof.
   As used in this section, "utility" means any electric light company, gas
company, natural gas company, pipe-line company, waterworks company or heating
or cooling company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(A)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8)
or (9), its lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or
operated by a political subdivision.
   As used in this section, to "tamper" means to interfere with, damage or
bypass a utility meter, conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the
correct registration of a meter or the proper functions of a conduit or
attachment so as to reduce the amount of utility service that is registered on
such meter.
 
   (b)   No person shall knowingly consume any gas, electricity, steam or water
that has not been correctly registered because a meter, conduit or attachment
of a utility has been tampered with, or knowingly use service that has been
discontinued by a utility and reconnected without the utility's consent.
 
   (c)   Such utility shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, of the
consequences of tampering with or bypassing a meter.
 
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of tampering with
utility equipment, a misdemeanor of the first degree, provided the cost of the
gas, electricity, steam or water stolen, plus the cost of repair or replacement
of the meters, conduits or attachments damaged in violation of subsection (a)
(1) or (2) hereof is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and provided the
offender has not previously been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)
hereof.  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof shall make restitution to the
utility for the cost of repair or replacement of the meters, conduits or
attachments damaged and for the value of the gas, electricity, steam or water
consumed.
 
   (e)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of theft of utility
service, a misdemeanor of the first degree, provided the value of the gas,
electricity, steam or water is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and
provided the offender has not previously been convicted of a violation of
subsection (b) hereof.  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof shall make
restitution to the utility for the value of the gas, electricity, steam or
water consumed in violation of that subsection.
 
545.06  MISREPRESENTATIONS IN EYEGLASS ADVERTISEMENTS.
   (a)   No person, partnership, corporation or any agent or employee therein,
engaged in or connected with the sale of eyeglasses, ophthalmic lenses,
eyeglass frames and mountings, shall include in any advertisement by newspaper,
radio, display or otherwise, any statement, or in any manner misrepresent any
such frames, mountings or other material or prices for the same or services or
credit terms.
 
   (b)   No person, partnership, corporation or agent or employee therein
engaged in or connected with the sale of eyeglasses, ophthalmic lenses,
eyeglass frames and mountings, shall include in any advertisement by newspaper,
radio, display or otherwise, any statement advertising the price of lenses, or
of complete eyeglasses, including lenses, either with or without professional
services or credit terms, installment payments or price plans; or the price of
any frames or mountings, unless in conjunction therewith the words, "without
lenses" appear in such manner to be clearly discernible, or read in such manner
as to be clearly understood.
(Ord. 4217.  Passed 11-9-42.)
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
 
545.07  VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly enter into or upon a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of vehicle trespass,
a minor misdemeanor.
 
545.08  FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card;
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it to have been forged.
      (3)   As used in this section, "identification card" means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words "identity," "identification," "identification card" or other similar
words appear on the card.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 (B), forging identification
cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor
of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the offender
a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(ORC 2913.31)
 
545.09  IDENTITY FRAUD.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Section
545.09 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances.  Ohio R.C. 2913.49, from
which Section
545.09 was derived, has been reclassified from a misdemeanor to a felony
offense.)
 
545.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 549
Weapons and Explosives
 
549.01   Definitions.
549.02   Discharging firearms.
549.03   Throwing or shooting missiles.
549.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Permit to sell fireworks at wholesale - see Ohio R.C. 3743.321
License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance - see Ohio R.C. 2923.18
Hunting prohibited - see GEN. OFF.
505.11
Reporting gunshot and stab wounds - see GEN. OFF.
525.05(b)
Property destruction by tear gas device, etc. - see GEN. OFF.
541.03
 
549.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Deadly weapon" means any instrument, device or thing capable of
inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or
possessed, carried or used as a weapon.
   (b)   (1)   "Firearm" means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant.  "Firearm" includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is
inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   (c)   "Handgun" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in subsection (c)(1) of this section can be assembled.
   (d)   "Semi-automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or specially
adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding
cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (e)   "Automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (f)   "Sawed-off firearm" means a shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen
inches long, or a rifle with a barrel less than sixteen inches long, or a
shotgun or rifle less than twenty-six inches long overall.  “Sawed-off firearm”
does not include any firearm with an overall length of at least twenty-six
inches that is approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968", 82 Stat. 1213, 18
U.S.C. 921(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the
“National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. 5845(a).
   (g)   "Zip-gun" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, that
is not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a
firearm;
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device or safety device, that is
not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
   (h)   "Explosive device" means any device designed or specially adapted to
cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and
consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. 
"Explosive device" includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive
demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive
charge, and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or
arranged so as to explode.
   (i)   "Incendiary device" means any firebomb, and any device designed or
specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of
fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite
it.
   (j)   "Ballistic knife" means a knife with a detachable blade that is
propelled by a spring-operated mechanism.
   (k)   "Dangerous ordnance" means any of the following, except as provided in
subsection (l) hereof:
      (1)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife;
      (2)   Any explosive device or incendiary device;
      (3)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating or demolitions;
      (4)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;
      (5)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor;
      (6)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
   (l)   "Dangerous ordnance" does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder;
      (2)   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm;
      (3)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its actual
age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical, hydraulic,
pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the tube into
battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for use only
with black powder;
      (4)   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection (l)(3) hereof
during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and target
practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps possessed
and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-
arms ammunition;
      (5)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio or museum piece.
      (6)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968," 82 Stat. 1213, 18
U.S.C.921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
      (7)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least twenty-six inches
that is approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms,
and Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968", 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C.
921(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the
“National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. 5845(a).
   (m)   “Explosive” means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  “Explosive”
includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2,
division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  “Explosive” does
not include “fireworks”, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in
any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80, and the rules of the Fire
Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82. 
   (n)   (1)   “Concealed handgun license” or “license to carry a concealed
handgun” means, subject to subsection (n)(2) of this section, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a
concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or a license to carry
a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 means only a license of the
type that is specified in that section.  A reference in any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.1213, a licence to carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency
basis means only a license of the type that is specified in Ohio R.C.
2923.1213.  A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
   (o)   “Valid concealed handgun license” or “valid license to carry a
concealed handgun” means a concealed handgun license that is currently valid,
that is not under a suspension under division (A)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.128,
under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other
than this State in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked
under division (B)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.128, under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213 or under
a revocation provision of the state other than this State in which the license
was issued.
   (p)   “Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year”
does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (q)   “Alien registration number” means the number issued by the United
States Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the
alien’s permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the
“USCIS number” or the “alien number”.
   (r)   “Active duty” has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. 101. 
      (ORC 2923.11)
      (Ord. 17-289. Passed 12-5-17.)
 
549.02  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver,
pistol or other firearm within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
 
   (b)   This section does not apply when firearms are used in self defense, in
the discharge of official duty or when otherwise lawfully authorized.
 
   (c)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. 
 
549.03  THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES.
   (a)   No person shall throw, shoot or propel an arrow, missile, pellet,
stone, metal or other similar substance capable of causing physical harm to
persons or property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of
another, or from any private property into or onto any public place or the
property of another.  This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges
or instruction nor when otherwise lawfully authorized.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
 
549.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 553
Railroads
 
553.01   Obstructing streets by railroad companies.
553.011   Obstructing streets by abandoning the locomotive.
553.02   Climbing upon railroad cars.
553.03   Duties of locomotive engineer.
553.04   Speed limit for trains or locomotives.
553.05   Recovery of penalties by civil action.
553.06   Trains must have sufficient motive power before attempting to cross
street.
553.07   Obstructing fire division prohibited.
553.08   Running switches across streets prohibited.
553.09   Railroad vandalism.
553.10   Grade crossing device vandalism.
553.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Lighting railroads - see Ohio R.C. 723.33 et seq.
Power to regulate train speed - see Ohio R.C. 723.48
Vehicular homicide - see Ohio R.C. 2903.07
Criminal mischief - see GEN. OFF.
541.03
 
553.01  OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY RAILROAD COMPANIES.
   (a)   (1)   No railroad company shall obstruct or permit or cause to be
obstructed a public street, road or highway by permitting a railroad car,
locomotive or other obstruction to remain upon or across it for longer than
five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing
along or upon such street, road or highway. 
      (2)   At the end of each five minute period of obstruction of a public
street, road or highway, each railroad company shall cause such railroad car,
locomotive or other obstruction to be removed for sufficient time, not less
than three minutes, to allow the passage of persons and vehicles waiting to
cross.
      (3)   This section does not apply to obstruction of a public street, road
or highway by a continuously moving through train or caused by circumstances
wholly beyond the control of the railroad company, but does apply to other
obstructions, including without limitation those caused by stopped trains and
trains engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations.
      (4)   If a railroad car, locomotive, or other obstruction is obstructing
a public street, road, or highway in violation of subsection (a)(1) hereof and
the violation occurs in the unincorporated area of one or more counties, or in
one or more municipal corporations, the officers and employees of each affected
county or municipal corporation may charge the railroad company with only one
violation of the law arising from the same facts and circumstances and the same
act.
      (5)   Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this
subsection (a)(1) hereof, summons shall be issued to the railroad company
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular
ticket or freight agent of the company in the county where the offense
occurred. 
(ORC 5589.21)
 
   (b)   For purposes of this section, "railroad company" includes the
officers, employees and agents of such company.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000).
 
553.011 OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY ABANDONING THE LOCOMOTIVE.
   (a)   No railroad company shall obstruct, or permit or cause to be
obstructed, a public street, road, or highway, by permitting any part of a
train whose crew has abandoned the locomotive to remain across it for longer
than five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person
passing along or upon the street, road, or highway, unless the safety of the
train crew requires them to abandon the locomotive.
   (b)   Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this
section, summons shall be issued to the railroad company pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular ticket or freight
agent of the company in the county where the offense occurred.  (ORC 5589.211)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be fined five thousand dollars ($5,000).
(ORC 5589.99)
553.02  CLIMBING UPON RAILROAD CARS.
   (a)   No person shall climb, jump, step or stand upon or cling or attach
himself to a locomotive, engine or car upon the track of a railroad, unless in
compliance with law or by permission under the rules and regulations of the
corporation managing such railroad.
(ORC 4999.02)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
553.03  DUTIES OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEER.
   (a)   No person in charge of a locomotive shall fail to bring the locomotive
to a full stop at least 200 feet before arriving at a crossing with another
track, or proceed through the crossing before signaled to do so or before the
way is clear.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  If violation of this section causes physical harm to any person,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4999.04)
(Ord. 14-288. Passed 11-12-14.)
 
553.04  SPEED LIMIT FOR TRAINS OR LOCOMOTIVES.
   No railroad company or any engineer or conductor thereof shall run any
locomotive or railroad car within the corporate limits of the City at a rate of
speed exceeding twenty miles per hour.
(Ord. 552.  Passed 9-10-07.)
553.05  RECOVERY OF PENALTIES BY CIVIL ACTION.
   The City Manager shall, by civil action in behalf of the City, recover
against any engineer, conductor or company violating the provisions of Section
553.04, the penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 552.  Passed 9-10-07.)
553.06  TRAINS MUST HAVE SUFFICIENT MOTIVE POWER BEFORE ATTEMPTING TO CROSS
STREET.
   No conductor, engineer or other person in charge of any car, cars or train
of cars shall move or attempt to move the same upon or to cross or attempt to
cross any of the streets or other public highways of the City without
sufficient motive power attached thereto to readily move and quickly start and
stop such car, cars, or trains of cars.
(1907 Code Sec. 295)
553.07  OBSTRUCTING FIRE DIVISION PROHIBITED.
   No conductor, engineer or other person in charge of any locomotive, car,
cars or train of cars shall obstruct for any period of time whatever the free
passage of any fire engine or other fire apparatus on its way to extinguish a
fire.
(1907 Code Sec. 296)
553.08  RUNNING SWITCHES ACROSS STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No conductor, engineer or other person in charge of any locomotive, car,
cars or train of cars shall make or cause to be made any running switch or
switches of any car or cars upon or across any street or other public highway
of the City.
(1907 Code Sec. 297)
553.09  RAILROAD VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain
on the land or premises of a railroad company.
   (e)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism.  Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car or other railroad
vehicle.  Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
interference with the operation of a train.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad vandalism;
criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad
vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this
section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a substantial risk of
physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or serious
physical harm to any person, the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 2909.10)
553.10  GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of railroad grade crossing
device vandalism.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad
grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
violation of this section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, railroad grade crossing
device vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State
law.
(ORC 2909.101)
553.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section
501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 557
Park Rules and Regulations
 
557.01   Definitions.
557.02   Rules and regulations.
557.03   Removal or destruction of park property.
557.04   Deposit of materials.
557.05   Alcoholic beverages.
557.06   Traffic.
557.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate - see Ohio R.C. 755.25
Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07(E)
Parking of motor vehicles - see TRAF. Ch.
351
Operation of motor vehicles - see TRAF. Ch.
331 -
341
Property offenses - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
541
 
557.01  DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever the words, terms or expressions herein defined, or pronouns used in
their stead, occur in this chapter, they shall have the meanings given below:
   (a)   "Board" or "the Board" means the Board of Parks and Recreation of the
City.
   (b)   "Director" means the Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (c)   "Park" or "parks" includes all property owned or held in trust by the
City for park purposes.
   (d)   "Motor vehicle" means the same as defined in Chapter
301 of the Traffic Code.
   (e)   "Drug of abuse" means the same as defined in Chapter
513 of the General Offenses Code.
   (f)   "Beer" and "intoxicating liquor" means the same as defined in Chapter
529 of the General Offenses Code.
   (g)   "Ball Diamond Complex" means Municipal Stadium and the softball
diamonds located at Davey Moore Park and Lagonda Fields and the areas
immediately adjacent thereto as shown on the drawings on file in the office of
the Clerk of the City Commission.
      (Ord. 89-455.  Passed 8-15-89.)
 
557.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following rules and regulations are for the protection, care, and
government of its parks and the use thereof by the public and are in addition
to rules and regulations adopted by the Board pursuant to Chapter
161.
 
557.03  REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall remove, destroy, cut, break, injure, mutilate, write upon,
or deface in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall,
fence, railing, vehicle, equipment, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower or
any other property in any park.
(Ord. 79-191.  Passed 5-22-79.)
 
557.04  DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS.
   (a)   No person shall deposit or discard in or adjacent to a park any paper,
garbage, ashes, refuse or other noxious or waste material, other than in
receptacles provided for the disposal of such materials.
 
   (b)   No person shall bring into a park any garbage, ashes, refuse or other
noxious or waste material and deposit or discard the same in or adjacent to a
park.
 
   (c)   No person shall, while in or adjacent to a park discharge, throw, drop
or cause to flow into park waters any noxious or deleterious substance, either
solid or liquid.
(Ord. 79-191.  Passed 5-22-79.)
 
557.05  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no person shall
consume or permit the consumption of any kind of beer or intoxicating liquor
within park property except as permitted within restaurant facilities located
on park property, or as purchased from a concessionaire lawfully operating from
within a ball diamond complex and consumed within the complex.  Such complexes
shall be posted so as to indicate the areas in which the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages is restricted.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be construed as
limiting the power of the Board to regulate the conduct of persons playing or
otherwise participating in golf, baseball, softball or any other sporting event
or activity while on park property.
   (c)   No person shall possess or use any drug of abuse within park property.
   (d)   No person shall enter or remain in any park while under the influence
of beer or intoxicating liquor or any drug of abuse.
   (e)   Subsection (a) hereof shall not apply to the sale and consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor, sold by the individual drink, pursuant to a permit
issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control, and with the prior
authorization of the Board of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. 84-366.  Passed 7-31-84.)
557.06  TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any park except on and
within the roadways provided for such motor vehicles.
 
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any park in such a manner
as to endanger the operator or any other person or any property.
 
   (c)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any park in excess of the
posted speed limit.
 
   (d)   No person shall park or leave a motor vehicle in an area of any park
at a time when such area is not open to the public.
 
   (e)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on the grass in any park, or
alongside any roadway or other area of any park where signs prohibit parking,
except at the direction of a police officer.
(Ord. 79-191.  Passed 5-22-79.)
 
557.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of Section
557.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of Section
557.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
 
   (c)   Whoever violates any other provision of this chapter where another
penalty is not otherwise provided or any rule or regulation adopted by the
Board pursuant to Chapter
161 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree for each subsequent violation.
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART SEVEN--BUSINESS REGULATION CODE
 
Chap.
701.    Landlord-Tenant Rights and Responsibilities.
Chap.
705.   Handbill Distribution.
Chap.
707.   Sexually Oriented Businesses.
Chap.
739.   Salvage Yard Operators.
Chap.
741.   Peddlers.
Chap.
749.   Public Utilities.
Chap.
765.   Taxicabs.
Chap.
769.   Used Motor Vehicles and Parts.
Chap.
771.   Garage Sales.
Chap.
775.   Ice Cream Trucks.
Chap.
776.   Food Trucks.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 701
Landlord-Tenant Rights and Responsibilities
 
701.01   Definitions.
701.02   Landlord obligations.
701.03   Tenant-initiated housing complaints.
701.04   Rental agreement disputes.
701.01  DEFINITIONS
   As used in this Section:
   (a)   “Tenant” means a person entitled under a rental agreement to the use
and occupancy of residential premises to the exclusion of others;
   (b)   “Landlord” means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of residential
premises, the agent of the owner, lessor, or sublessor, or any person
authorized by the owner, lessor, or sublessor to manage the premises or to
receive rent from a tenant under a rental agreement.
 
701.02  LANDLORD OBLIGATIONS
   Landlords shall furnish to all their tenants information regarding the
rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants under Revised Code Chapter
5321, the Ohio Landlord-Tenant Act, according to the following processes and
terms and conditions:
   (a)   the landlord shall deliver to the tenant before the tenant begins to
occupy the premises either:
      (1)   a printed pamphlet regarding the rights and responsibilities of
landlords and tenants under Revised Code Chapter 5321, the Ohio Landlord-Tenant
Act, prepared by the City , or
      (2)   a written notice that an electronic copy of the pamphlet may be
found at an internet address specified by the Community Development Director.
   (b)   Receipt of either the printed pamphlet or the notice with the internet
address must be acknowledged by signature of the tenant stating that the tenant
has received either the printed pamphlet or the notice with the internet
address.  A prominent warning shall be featured near the place of affixing
signatures that forging of any signature may have criminal penalties.
   (c)   The Community Development Director shall make available to landlords
at no cost, the pamphlet described in §(a)1 above and a specimen notice
described in §(a)(2) above.
   (d)   If a landlord fails to produce a copy of a signed receipt described in
subsection (b) above upon request by the Community Development Director or the
director’s designee, the Director or designee shall issue to the landlord a
notice of violation. 
   (e)   A second violation by a landlord in the same twelve month period is a
Class B Civil Offense under the terms of Chapter
1324 of these Codified Ordinances.
 
701.03  TENANT-INITIATED HOUSING COMPLAINTS
   When the City receives a complaint from a tenant of Code violations on the
premises of the property subject to a rental agreement, the City shall give
notice in writing to the landlord, including the nature of the complaint.  If a
landlord, after receipt of such notice, fails to remedy the condition within a
reasonable time considering the severity of the condition and the time
necessary to remedy it, the City may proceed with enforcement measures to gain
Code compliance. 
 
701.04  RENTAL AGREEMENT DISPUTES
   Landlords and tenants shall have such rights and remedies as are provided in
Chapter 5321 of the Ohio Revised Code with respect to disputes concerning the
rental agreement.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 705
Handbill Distribution
 
705.01   Bill distribution resulting in littering.
705.02   Bill distributors not to ring doorbells.
705.03   Placing advertising material on vehicles prohibited.
705.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate advertising - see Ohio R.C. 715.65
Trespassing - see Ohio R.C. 2911.21
Littering - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
 
705.01  BILL DISTRIBUTION RESULTING IN LITTERING.
   No person distributing handbills or other advertising matter shall throw,
cast or deposit, or cause such handbills or other advertising matter to be
thrown, cast or deposited in or upon any yard, doorstep, porch, street, alley,
lane, or any other public place within the City so that the same becomes
littered or scattered.
(Ord. 71-70.  Passed 5-4-71.)
 
705.02  BILL DISTRIBUTORS NOT TO RING DOORBELLS.
   No person distributing handbills, circulars or other advertisements, shall
ring the doorbell or otherwise call the occupants of any residence to the door
for the purpose of receiving such handbill, circular or other advertisement
that such person may be distributing.
(Ord. 71-70.  Passed 5-4-71.)
 
705.03  PLACING ADVERTISING MATERIAL ON VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place any handbill, circular, card, paper, or other
advertising matter in or hang the same upon any part of any motor vehicle or
cause the same to be done, while such motor vehicle is in use or standing
parked upon the streets of the City.  However, this section shall not be
construed to prevent the officers or employees of the City from so doing for
any Municipal purpose.
(Ord. 71-70.  Passed 5-4-71.)
 
705.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 707
Sexually Oriented Businesses
 
707.01   Purpose and intent.
707.02   Definitions.
707.03   Operator's license requirements.
707.04   Processing applications for sexually oriented business licenses.
707.05   Expiration and renewal of operator's license.
707.06   Suspension and revocation of operator's license.
707.07   Transfer of operator's license.
707.08   Right of entry.
707.09   Sexually oriented business employee permit.
707.10   Expiration and renewal of sexually oriented business employee permit.
707.11   Suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business employee and
independent contractor's permit.
707.12   Notices.
707.13   Appeal.
707.14   Standards of conduct and operation applicable to adult cabarets.
707.15   Regulations regarding minors and sexually oriented businesses.
707.16   Business operations standards.
707.17   Prohibitions.
707.18   Injunction and other.
 
NOTE:  This chapter in its entirety was adopted with Ordinance No. 19-85 passed
March 26, 2019.
 
707.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   It is the intent of this Chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses, to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the City, and to regulate their operation, thereby reducing
or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented
businesses.
 
   (b)   It is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter and in
Part Eleven - Zoning Code:
   (a)   "Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, or other
visual representations, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are
regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (b)   "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, private club,
bottle club, juice bar or similar commercial establishment, whether or not
alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   (c)   "Adult motel" means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which offers public accommodation, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises
the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign
visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio, television, internet or social media.
   (d)   "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs, slides or similar
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are
regularly shown for any form of consideration.
   (e)   "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or live
performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities which is not customarily open to the general
public during such features because it excludes minors by reason of age.
   (f)   "Applicant" means any person who signs an application for a license to
operate a sexually oriented business under Section
707.03.
   (g)   "Conviction" or "convicted" means a finding of guilt by a court of
law, but shall not include convictions overturned on appeal prior to the date
of application under this Chapter.
   (h)   "Employee" means a person who works or performs in and/or for a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a
salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business, or a
person who receives any form of remuneration, tips of any kind or gratuities
from the operator or customers of said business.
   (i)   "Entertainer" means any person who provides sexually oriented adult
entertainment in an adult cabaret or sexual encounter establishment whether or
not an employee of the operator and whether or not a fee is charged or accepted
for such entertainment.
   (j)   "Escort" means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately appear in the state of
nudity or semi-nudity for another person.
   (k)   "Escort agency" means a person or business association that furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   (l)   "Establishment" means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
Chapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this Chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
   (m)    "Independent contractor" means a person who contracts with a sexually
oriented business establishment to provide services on behalf of the sexually
oriented business to the patrons of such business, whether or not the
individual receives any remuneration, gratuity or tips of any kind, or pays the
owner or operator for the right to perform or entertain in the sexually
oriented business. The intention of this paragraph is to exclude those persons
who are not employees and who are not reasonably expected to have contact with
customers or patrons of the sexually oriented business, including, but not
limited to, persons on the licensed premises performing repair or maintenance
services or delivering goods to the licensed premises.
   (n)   "License holder" means a person or entity in whose name a license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued.
   (o)   "Licensed premises" means any premises on which a business that holds
a license issued under this Chapter is located.
   (p)   "Manager" means any person who participates directly in the day-to-day
management of the sexually oriented business.
   (q)   "Massage parlor" means any place where, for any form of consideration
massage, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body which occurs
as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities is offered, or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related
thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas.
   (r)   "Nude, nudity or state of nudity" means a live person exhibiting: (a)
the anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female
breast; or (b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover the
anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female
breast.
   (s)   "Operate or cause to be operated" means to cause to function or to put
or keep in operation.
   (t)   "Operator" means and includes any persons on the licensed premises of
a sexually oriented business who are authorized to exercise overall operational
control of the business or who cause to function or put or keep in operation
the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner
or license holder of the business.
   (u)   "Owner" includes any person or entity listed as an owner on the
application for a license to operate a sexually oriented business and the
manager, operator or person in charge of the business.
   (v)   "Physical contact" means deliberately touching another person or
another person's clothing.
   (w)    "Regularly features" or "regularly shown" means, with respect to an
adult theatre or adult cabaret, that as a consistent course of conduct, the
business displays films or performances containing the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (x)   "Semi-nude model studio" means any place where a person regularly
appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or displays specified anatomical
areas for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
   (y)   "Semi-nude, semi-nudity or a state of semi-nudity" means a state of
dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region
and areolas of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
   (z)   "Sex Store" means a retail business offering goods for sale or rent
and that meet any of the following tests:
      (1)   More than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or more than ten
percent (10%) of the gross public floor area of the business consists of
"sexually- oriented novelties or toys";
      (2)   It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following
categories: "adult media," "sexually-oriented novelties or toys," lingerie, or
apparel or other items marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use
for sadomasochistic practices, and the combination of such items constitutes
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade of the business or occupies
more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area of the business; or
      (3)   Which advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a sexually
oriented business by use of such terms as "sex toys," "marital aids," "X-
rated," "XXX," "adult," "sex," "nude," or otherwise advertises or holds itself
out as a sexually oriented business.
      (4)   "Sex store" shall not include any establishment which, as a
substantial portion of its business, offers for sale or rental to persons
employed in the medical, legal or education professions anatomical models,
including representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or other
models, displays, and exhibits produced and marketed primarily for use in the
practice of medicine or law or for use by an educational institution.
   (aa)   "Sexual encounter establishment" means a business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration: (a) a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the
exposure of specified anatomical areas; or (b) activities between male and
female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons
is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. A "sexual encounter establishment" does
not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the State of Ohio
engages in medically approved and recognized therapy.
   (bb)   "Sexually oriented adult entertainment" means a live performance at
an adult cabaret.
   (cc)   "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment,
sex store, escort agency or semi-nude model studio, as the terms are defined in
this Chapter.
   (dd)   "Simulate" means to assume the mere appearance of something, without
the reality; to imitate or pretend.
   (ee)   "Specified anatomical areas," means and includes any of the
following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or areolas or nipple of female breasts; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   (ff)   "Specified criminal act," means sexual crimes against children,
sexual abuse, rape or the following crimes connected with another sexually
oriented business: distribution of material harmful to minors, prostitution or
tax violations.
   (gg)   "Specified sexual activities," means and includes any of the
following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breast;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.
   (hh)   "Transfer of ownership or control," shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the sexually oriented business,
except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
   (ii)   "Viewing room" means the room, booth or area where a patron of a
sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a
film, video or other video reproduction.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.03  OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Any person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business within
the City must make application for a license under this Section.  A person
operating a sexually oriented business prior to the effective date of this
ordinance must apply for such a license within sixty (60) days of the effective
date.
 
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
City. An individual who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business shall
sign the application for a license. An entity that wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file an application for a license signed by an
authorized representative of the entity.
 
   (c)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the documents indicated:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         A.   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases;
         B.   A partnership, the applicant shall state the partnership's
complete name, provide a copy of the legal document establishing the
organization, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to accept service of process, and the legal name and any aliases of
each general partner;
         C.   A corporation, the applicant shall state the corporation's
complete name, provide a copy of the legal document establishing the
organization all trade names used by the corporation and the name and address
of the statutory agent;
         D.   A limited liability company or limited liability partnership, the
applicant shall state the name of the limited liability company or limited
liability partnership, provide a copy of the legal document establishing the
organization, the name and address of the agent for service of process, and the
legal name and all trade names used by the limited liability company or limited
liability partnership.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the
sexually oriented business's fictitious name and evidence that the fictitious
name has been registered with the Ohio Secretary of State.
      (3)   A sworn statement as to whether the applicant, or any officer,
director, member or general partner of the applicant has, within the five- year
period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act, and, if so, the name of the pertinent applicant or
manager, the specified criminal act involved, the date of the conviction and
the place of conviction.
      (4)   A sworn statement as to whether the applicant, or any officer,
director, member or general partner of the applicant has had a previous license
under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business regulations from
another city, county, township or state denied, suspended or revoked within a
five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, including
the name of the pertinent applicant or officer, director, member or general
partner of the applicant, the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation, reason for the same and length of
suspension.
      (5)   A sworn statement as to whether the applicant or any officer,
director, member or general partner of the applicant holds any other permits
and/or licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
from another city, county, township or state and, if so, the name of the
pertinent applicant, officer, director, member or general partner and the names
and locations of such other licensed businesses.
      (6)   The type of sexually oriented business for which the applicant is
filing a license application.
      (7)   The proposed location of the sexually oriented business, including
a legal description of the licensed premises, and street address.
      (8)   Written proof of date of birth of any individual applicant.
      (9)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the licensed
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn
to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot.
      (10)   Written authorization for the completion of a criminal background
check for each owner, operator, manager, officer, director, member or general
partner of the applicant.
      (11)   A list of the names of all employees and independent contractors
require to hold a permit under Section
707.09(a) to be employed upon the opening of the business.
      (12)   The application shall be sworn to be true and complete.
 
   (d)   In the event that the City Manager determines or learns at any time
that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed
sexually oriented business, or that information within the application is
inaccurate, the City Manager shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact
and allow the applicant ten days to properly complete or correct the
application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed
during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly
complete the application.
 
   (e)   The applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this
Chapter to defray the administrative expenses associated with processing the
application, including, but not limited to, any reasonable investigations
associated therewith.
 
   (f)   The fact that a person possesses other types of State or City permits
and/or licenses does not exempt that person from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business license or qualify that person for a sexually
oriented business license.
 
   (g)   Names and residential addresses gathered pursuant to the above
provisions constitute protected private information. As such and in accordance
with , Déjà Vu of Nashville, Inc. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville, 274
F.3d 377 (Sixth Circuit, 2001), they are exempt from Ohio's Public Records Act.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.04  PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES.
   (a)   The City Manager is responsible for granting, denying, revoking,
renewing and suspending sexually oriented business operator's licenses. The
City Manager may delegate these responsibilities to another person or office by
entry in the City Manager's Journal.
 
   (b)   In the event that the City Manager determines or learns at any time
that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed
sexually oriented business, or that information within the application is
inaccurate, the City Manager shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact
and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete or correct the
application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed
during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly
complete the application.
 
   (c)   The City Manager may delegate the duties assigned to the City Manager
under this Chapter by an entry in the City Manager's Journal.
 
   (d)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the City and upon
payment of the application fee, the City Manager shall promptly evaluate the
application in accordance with this Chapter.
 
   (e)   The City Manager shall grant the application unless:
      (1)   Any applicant, or any officer, director, member or general partner
of the applicant  is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Any applicant or any officer, director, member or general partner
of the applicant is overdue on his or her payment to the City of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in
relation to a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   Any applicant or any officer, director, member or general partner
of the applicant has failed to comply with Section
707.03;
      (4)   Granting of the application would violate a court order;
      (5)   An applicant has failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
insufficient;
      (6)   Any applicant or any officer, director, member or general partner
of the applicant has a license under this Chapter which has been suspended more
than three times or revoked during the five-year period preceding the
application; or
         A.   Any applicant or any officer, director, member or general partner
of the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which less
than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the date of
completion of probation, or the date of release from confinement, for the
specified criminal acts.
         B.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on disqualification of the applicant.
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business fails to
satisfy the criteria set forth in the applicable provisions of
Part Eleven - Zoning Code, unless the sexually oriented business was lawfully
operating in its present location on the effective date of this ordinance.
      (8)   The application fee has not been paid.
 
   (f)   If the City Manager fails to act with respect to a properly filed
application within ten (10) days of its submission, the application shall be
deemed granted.
 
   (g)   If the City Manager denies the application, the City Manager shall
promptly notify the applicant of the denial in writing and state the reasons(s)
for the denial.
 
   (h)   If granted, the license shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the type of sexually
oriented business approved and the address of the sexually oriented business.
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous interior location at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any
time by a reasonable person.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.05  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
   (a)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in Section
707.03 and paying the renewal fee.
 
   (b)   The annual license renewal fee for a sexually oriented business
license is one hundred dollars ($100.00). A license shall not be issued until
the annual license renewal fee is paid. The annual license renewal fee shall be
due each year for which the application for a renewal of the license for the
business is received.
 
   (c)   The City Manager shall grant the renewal application unless one of the
conditions in
707.04(e) above applies.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.06  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
   (a)   The City Manager may suspend an operator's license issued under this
Chapter upon finding any of the following:
      (1)   The operator or any officer, director, member or general partner or
manager of the operator:
         A.   Violated any section of this Chapter; or
         B.   Has been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances while working in or on the sexually oriented business premises; or
         C.   Tolerated or allowed illegal gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises; or
         D.   Engaged in the transfer of a license contrary to Section
707.07(a)(b)(c); or
         E.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours
of operation in Section
707.16(a)(3)(4); or
         F.   Employed a person who does not have a valid permit as required in
Section
707.09.
 
   (b)   A suspension shall be for a period of no less than thirty (30) days
nor more than ninety (90) days.
 
   (c)   The City Manager shall revoke an operator's license issued under this
Chapter upon finding any of the following:
      (1)   An Operator's License has been granted based upon false
information; or
      (2)   An operator or manager knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances in or on the premises; or
      (3)   An operator or manager knowingly allowed prostitution on the
licensed premises; or
      (4)   An operator or manager knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the license was suspended; or
      (5)   A License Holder or any officer, director, member or general
partner of the License Holder has been convicted of a specified criminal act
for which the time period required in Section
707.04(6)(a) has not elapsed; or
      (6)   On three or more occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period,
the City Manager has suspended the License Holder's license under this Chapter;
or
      (7)   On two or more occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period, a
person has been convicted of a specified criminal act on the licensed premise.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
revocation of the license; or
      (8)   A License Holder is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or
fees related to a sexually oriented business; or
      (9)   A License Holder or a manager has knowingly allowed any sexual
activity, as defined in either Ohio R.C. 2907.01, or in Section
707.02(gg) above to occur on the licensed premises; or
      (10)   A license holder has failed to comply with Section
707.08 on three or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period.
 
   (d)   The revocation of an Operator's License is permanent. The holder of an
Operator's License that has been revoked shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business Operator's License for any other location in the City during
the four (4) year period beginning with the effective date of the revocation. 
 
   (e)   Appeal.  The holder of an operator's license that has been suspended
or revoked may appeal as provided in Section
707.13.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.07  TRANSFER OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
   (a)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business under the
authority of an Operator's License at any place other than the address
designated in the license.
 
   (b)   No license holder shall transfer a license to another person or
another sexually oriented business unless and until the proposed transferee has
been issued an Operator's License under this Chapter.
 
   (c)   No license may be transferred if the City Manager determines that the
Operator's License to be transferred is subject to suspension or revocation.
 
   (d)   Any attempt to transfer a license either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void and the license shall be
deemed revoked.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.08  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   By applying for or receiving a license under this Chapter all owners and
operators of a sexually oriented business grant to the City and its agents and
employees a right of entry to the licensed premises during hours in which it is
open for business and during such additional hours as are reasonable in order
to allow them to assure continuing compliance with the regulations of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.09  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE PERMIT.
   (a)   All applicants for a sexually oriented business employee permit shall
submit an application on a form to be provided by the City Manager containing
the following information:
      (1)   The individual's name and a personal or business address where mail
may be delivered.
      (2)   Written proof of date of birth showing that the individual is at
least 18 years of age.
      (3)   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a similar license,
permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended in the two
years immediately preceding the application. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, the individual shall state the date, the name of the
issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the
denial, revocation or suspension and the length of the suspension. A copy of
any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application if applicable.
      (4)   A statement as to whether the individual has been convicted of a
specified criminal act as defined in Section
707.02(ff) within five years including the date, place, nature of each
conviction, and the court in which the conviction occurred.
      (5)   Two identical passport-quality photographs of the individual,
approximately two inches in size, taken within the preceding year, for use on
the permit and application.
 
   (b)   Each applicant for such a permit shall pay a permit fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
 
   (c)   The City Manager shall issue a permit unless:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or inaccurate in any material
respect.
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as
defined in Section
707.02(ff).
      (4)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee and
independent contractor's permit revoked by the City within two (2) years of the
date of the current application or suspended three or more times within three
(3) years of the date of the current application.
      (5)   The applicant has had a similar license, permit, or authorization
to do business issued by another jurisdiction denied, revoked or suspended in
the two (2) years immediately preceding the application.
 
   (d)   If the City Manager fails to act with respect to a properly filed
application within ten (10) days of its submission, the application shall be
deemed granted.
 
   (e)   Names and residential addresses gathered pursuant to the above
provisions constitute protected private information. As such and in accordance
with , Déjà Vu of Nashville, Inc. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville, 274
F.3d 377 (Sixth Circuit, 2001), they are exempt from Ohio's Public Records Act.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.10  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE PERMIT.
   (a)   Each permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section
707.09 and paying the renewal fee.
 
   (b)   The annual permit renewal fee for a sexually oriented business
employee and independent contractor permit is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A
permit shall not be issued until the annual permit renewal fee is paid. The
annual permit renewal fee shall be due each year for which the application for
a renewal of the permit for the business is received.
 
   (c)   The City Manager shall grant the renewal application unless one of the
conditions in Section
707.09(c) above applies.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.11  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE AND
INDEPENDENT CONTRATOR'S PERMIT.
   (a)   The City Manager may suspend a sexually oriented business employee and
independent contractor's permit upon finding any of the following:
      (1)   The permit holder's original or any renewal permit application
contained a material misstatement; or
      (2)   The permit holder was under the influence of alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances while working in or on the sexually oriented business
premises; or
      (3)   The permit holder participated in illegal gambling by any person on
the sexually oriented business premises; or
      (4)   The permit holder participated in operating the sexually oriented
business in violation of the hours of operation in Section
707.16.
 
   (b)   A suspension shall be for a period of no less than thirty (30) days
nor more than ninety (90) days.
 
   (c)   The City Manager may revoke a sexually oriented business employee and
independent contractor's permit upon finding any of the following:
      (1)   The permit holder participated in the possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises,
      (2)   The permit holder participated in prostitution on the licensed
premises,
      (3)   An operator or manager knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permit was suspended,
      (4)   The permit holder was been convicted of a specified criminal act
during the term of the permit,
      (5)   On three or more occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period,
the City Manager has suspended the holder's permit under this Chapter,
      (6)   The permit holder has allowed or attempted to allow another person
to use the holder's permit,
      (7)   The permit holder has participated in any sexual activity, as
defined in either Ohio R.C. 2907.01, or in Section
707.02(gg) above on the licensed premises,
      (8)   A permit holder has violated any provision of Section
707.16 on three (3) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period.
 
   (d)   The revocation of a sexually oriented business employee and
independent contractor's permit is permanent. 
 
   (e)   Appeal.  The holder of a sexually oriented business employee permit
that has been suspended or revoked may appeal as provided in Section
707.13.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.12  NOTICES.
   Any notices required pursuant to this Chapter not otherwise specified herein
shall be sufficient if served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal delivery to the applicants and permit holders affected at the
business or residential address listed on the application and addressed to the
business or applicant. If the permit is issued to an entity, service of notice
as provided above to the service agent listed on the application shall be
sufficient.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.13  APPEAL.
   (a)   If the City Manager issues a denial, suspension, or revocation of a
license or permit or application for a license or a permit under this Chapter,
the City Manager shall notify the applicant, permit holder or license holder in
writing of the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit or application,
including the grounds therefor, within three business days of such decision.
The notification shall be directed as provided in Section
707.04.
 
   (b)   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a permit has been appealed
and that decision becomes final, the applicant or license holder whose
application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been suspended or
revoked shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to the Ohio R.C. 2506.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.14  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND OPERATION APPLICABLE TO ADULT CABARETS.
   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult cabaret
regardless of whether or not a license has been issued to the business under
this Chapter shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   No entertainer shall be permitted to have any physical contact with
any other entertainer, employee or customer on the premises during any
performance.
      (2)   No customer at an adult cabaret shall be permitted to have any
physical contact with any entertainer or employee appearing in a state of semi-
nudity during a performance.
      (3)   The portion of the adult cabaret in which sexually oriented adult
entertainment is performed shall be on a stage or platform at least eighteen
(18) inches above the immediate floor level and that is separated from all
patron seating areas by at least six (6) feet.
      (4)   A sign in lettering at least three-fourths (¾) inch high shall be
conspicuously displayed in the public area of the business stating the
following:
         THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, OHIO.
CUSTOMERS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN PHYSICAL CONTACT WITH ENTERTAINERS.
DURING THE COURSE OF A PERFORMANCE. ENTERTAINERS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN
PHYSICAL CONTACT WITH ANY OTHER ENTERTAINER, EMPLOYEE OR CUSTOMER DURING A
PERFORMANCE. AT ALL TIMES DURING A PERFORMANCE, THE ENTERTAINER MUST MAINTAIN
AT LEAST A SIX (6) FOOT BUFFER ZONE FROM ALL CUSTOMERS.
         (Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.15  REGULATIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   No person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the
business, shall authorize, suffer or allow:
      (1)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises.
      (2)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business premises.
      (3)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the
business premises.
      (4)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee, contractor, subcontractor or employee of a contractor
or subcontractor.
 
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the license holder to obtain such
documentation as is necessary to assure that this section is not violated.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.16  BUSINESS OPERATIONS STANDARDS
   (a)   No person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the
business, shall authorize, suffer or allow:
      (1)   Any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the
premises nor allow any activity conducted on the premises to be visible from
any location outside of the building in which the sexually oriented business is
conducted.
      (2)   Any employee, independent contractor or other person in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity to be visible from outside of the building in which the
sexually oriented business is conducted.
      (3)   A business operating under a liquor permit issued by the State of
Ohio to remain open or to permit any employee to engage in a performance,
solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or
solicit a service beyond the hours of operation authorized by the liquor
permit.
      (4)   A business not operating under a liquor permit issued by the State
of Ohio to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service or solicit a service, before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight.
 
   (b)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the
business, shall furnish to the City Manager, the name of each person working as
an employee or independent contractor at the business premises prior to such
person beginning work.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.17  PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall operate more than one license of a sexually oriented
business at any one licensed premises.
 
   (b)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment or operation of any
sexually oriented businesses, as defined under this Chapter, within the City,
on any premises contrary to the applicable provisions of
Part Eleven of these codified ordinances -Zoning Code.
 
   (c)   No person shall establish or operate a sexually oriented business
except as authorized by a license issued under in this Chapter.
 
   (d)   No person shall employ another person as a sexually oriented business
employee or independent contractor who is not authorized to work or perform
services pursuant to this Chapter.
 
   (e)   No person who does not hold a permit issued under Section
707.09 above shall work as a sexually oriented business employee or independent
contractor.
 
   (f)   No employee of an adult cabaret shall have physical contact with any
other entertainer, employee, independent contractor or customer on the premises
during any performance.
 
   (g)   No person shall engage in any specified sexual activities while on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
 
   (h)   No owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall violate
Section
707.15, Regulation Regarding Minors and Sexually Oriented Businesses.
 
   (i)   No owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall violate
Section
707.16, Business Operations Standards.
 
   (j)   No person shall make any false statement with regard to any license or
permit required by this Chapter
707.
 
   (k)   A violation of Section
707.17(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) or (j) above is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
707.18  INJUNCTION AND OTHER REMEDIES
   (a)   The operation of a sexually oriented business other than as authorized
by a license issued under this Chapter is a public nuisance. The Law Director
is authorized to seek injunctive or other relief to abate such a nuisance.  If
any injunctive relief must be sought, reasonable attorneys' fees and related
costs and expenses shall be assessed at the discretion of the court against the
sexually oriented business, its owners and operators.
 
   (b)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be
cumulative and independently available to the City and the City shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full
extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 739
Salvage Yard Operators
 
739.01   Definitions.
739.02   License required.
739.03   Separate license for each salvage yard.
739.04   Salvage Yard Operator Licensing Board.
739.05   Enforcement.
739.06   Application for license; contents.
739.07   Investigation; approval and issuance of Salvage Yard Operator's
license.
739.08   Period of license.
739.09   License fees.
739.10   License not transferable.
739.11   General operating requirements.
739.12   Suspension and revocation of license.
739.13   Hearings.
739.14   Former salvage yards.
739.15   Injunction.
739.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate secondhand dealers--see Ohio R.C. 715.61
Dealing with minors prohibited; hours regulated--see Ohio R.C. 4737.03
State licensing and required fencing--see Ohio R.C. 4737.05 et seq.
Used motor vehicles and parts--see BUS. REG. Ch.
769
 
739.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of Chapter
739, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed
to them respectively.
   (a)   "Business premises" or "premises" means the area of a salvage yard as
described in a salvage yard operator's license or application for license as
provided in Chapter
739.
   (b)   "Salvage" means scrap iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other
base metals; used building materials; used plumbing, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning and electrical fixtures; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or
fabrics; old rubber and used tires; old bottles or other glass; bones,
wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be
used again in some form; used auto parts; wrecked, ruined or partially
dismantled motor vehicles and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be
used for scrap metal or stripping of parts.  "Salvage" shall include those
materials commonly or customarily referred to as "junk".  "Salvage" shall not
include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or
scraps (excepting therefrom parts of machines and vehicles) from the operation
of his own business and which are stored indoors or in an enclosed container;
materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his
own manufacturing processes; used articles made of precious metal, used
jewelry; or used furniture and household appliances in operating condition
stored indoors for resale.  "Salvage" shall not include garbage or rubbish.
   (c)   "Salvage yard" means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered,
outdoors or in an enclosed building when the salvage contained in the enclosed
building covers more than two hundred square feet of floor space in the
enclosed building, containing salvage, upon which occurs one or more acts of
buying, keeping, storing, dismantling, selling, recycling, exchanging, or
offering for sale any such salvage, in whole units or by parts, for a business
or commercial purpose, or for personal use, and including the processing of
iron, steel, nonferrous metals, or wastepaper for sale to be used in
manufacturing, whether or not the proceeds from such actor acts or such sale
are to be used for charity.
   (d)   "Salvage yard operator" means a person who operates a salvage yard.
   (e)   The terms "garbage" and "rubbish" shall have the same meaning given to
those terms in Chapter
919.
   (f)   The term "combustible salvage material" means readily ignitable and
free burning fibers, such as cotton, sisal, henequen, ixtle, jute, hemp, tow,
coca fiber, okum, bailed paper, kapok, hay, straw, spanish moss, excelsior and
synthetic fibers; those substances which have a flash point of above 80o
Fahrenheit to and including 150o Fahrenheit, as determined by the Tagliabue
open cup tester.
   (g)   The term "hazardous substance" means a substance or mixture of
substances which:
      (1)   Is Toxic;
      (2)   Is corrosive;
      (3)   Is an irritant;
      (4)   Is a strong sensitizor;
      (5)   Is radioactive and has a capacity to produce personal injury or
illness to man through ingestion, inhalation or absorption through any body
surface; or Generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means, if
such substances or mixture of substances may cause substantial personal injury
or substantial illness during or as a proximate result of any customary or
reasonably foreseeable handling or use, including reasonably foreseeable
ingestion by children.
         (Ord. 88-318.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
739.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall act as a salvage yard operator whether personally, by agents
or employees, or singly along with some other business or enterprise, without
first having obtained a license therefor from the Community Development
Department or while such license is under suspension or revocation as provided
in Section
739.12.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
739.03  SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH SALVAGE YARD.
   A salvage yard operator who operates more than one salvage yard within the
City shall be required to have a separate license for each salvage yard.
(Ord. 88-318.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
739.04  SALVAGE YARD OPERATOR LICENSING BOARD.
   A Salvage Yard Operator Licensing Board, hereinafter referred to as the
Licensing Board, consisting of the City Manager, Community Development
Director, Health Commissioner, Chief of the Police Division and the Chief of
the Fire Division, or their duly authorized representatives, is created with
the City Manager, or his duly authorized representative, as Chairman.  Except
where otherwise provided, a majority of the members of the Licensing Board
shall constitute a quorum.  The Licensing Board shall appoint a secretary for
itself from among the employees of the City, adopt its own procedural rules,
and keep a record of its proceedings and transactions.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
739.05  ENFORCEMENT.
   It is made the duty of the Licensing Board to enforce, or aid in the
enforcement of the provisions of Chapter
739, and for this purpose any member of the Board, or his duly authorized
representative, shall have the right and is empowered to enter upon any
premises on which any business subject to the provisions of these sections is
located, or is about to be located, and inspect the same at any reasonable
time.  The Licensing Board is further empowered to issue orders granting,
suspending, or revoking any license provided for in accordance with the
provisions of these sections.
(Ord. 88-318.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
739.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   (a)   An applicant for a salvage yard operator's license shall be supplied
an application blank by the Community Development Director which shall be
completed by the applicant and filed with the Chairman of the Licensing Board
together with the required fee.  The application shall be signed by the
applicant, if an individual, by all partners, if a partnership, and by the
president or chief officer, if a corporation or other organization.  The
application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before a notary public or
other officer authorized by law to administer oaths.
 
   (b)   All salvage yard operator applications shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   A.   The legal name and any trade names of applicant,
         B.   Whether the applicant is a sole proprietorship, general
partnership, limited partnership, corporation, association, trust or other type
of entity,
         C.   The applicant's business street address and mailing address,
         D.   The applicant's City income tax identification number and the
applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number,
         E.   The applicant's vendor license number and issue date,
         F.   The applicant's business telephone number,
         G.   A description of applicant's business activities, including
applicant's hours of operation, and
         H.   The name, residence street address, residence telephone number,
social security number, date of birth, residence addresses for the past five
years and the name and location of each business affiliate in the salvage
business during the past five years of applicant if the applicant is a sole
proprietorship or of applicant's manager if the applicant is managed by anyone
other than a sole proprietor.
      (2)   For each officer of an applicant corporation, for each general
partner of an applicant partnership, for each member of an applicant
association and for each trustee of an applicant trust:
         A.   The name, social security number and date of birth,
         B.   The residence street address and residence telephone number,
         C.   The individuals residence addresses for the past five years and
the name and location of each business affiliate in the salvage business during
the past five years,
         D.   The relationship of such person to applicant.
      (3)   With respect to the applicant and to each person specified in
subsection (b)(2) hereof a statement as to whether such person has been
previously convicted of any felony, any theft offense, any violations of Ohio
R.C. Chapters 4737 or 4738, or Chapter
739 of the City's Codified Ordinances and as to whether any indictments are
pending against such person.
      (4)   Regarding the premises to be used as a salvage yard:
         A.   The permanent parcel number(s),
         B.   The area of the premises in acres or square feet,
         C.   The name, address and telephone number of each holder(s) of a
freehold estate in the premises and all lessees and land contract vendees along
with a description of each such person's interest in the premises,
         D.   A description of each existing structure on the premises and a
description of the current and intended use of each such structure.
         E.   A description of combustible salvage material and hazardous
substances intended to be kept on the premises and the anticipated length of
time individual items of such materials would be kept on the premises.
      (5)   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of existing and
proposed fences together with a description of their construction, the location
of all buildings on the business premises, together with a description of the
type of construction of such buildings and their uses, and showing adjoining
streets, roads, and property lines, watercourses, fire lanes, points of ingress
and egress and storage locations for flammable materials, hazardous materials
and explosive materials.
         (Ord. 88-318.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
739.07  INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF SALVAGE YARD OPERATOR'S
LICENSE.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a salvage yard operator's license
as provided for herein, the Chairman of the Licensing Board shall furnish a
copy of the application to each of the other members of the Board.  The
proposed or existing premises and equipment with which the salvage yard is
being or is to be operated shall be examined by the other members of the Board
or their designees.
 
   (b)   The Chief of the Police Division shall cause an investigation to be
made to determine whether any of the persons listed in the application have on
two or more occasions been convicted of a violation of Chapter
739, violations of Ohio R.C. Chapters 4737 or 4738, or other crime related to
the business of salvage yard operator, within a period of five years preceding
the filing of such application, and the Chief of the Police Division shall
recommend that the license be issued only if the Chief of the Police Division
finds that there have been fewer than two such convictions during the five year
period.
 
   (c)   The Community Development Director shall recommend that the license be
issued only if he finds that the land on which the business is located and any
existing or proposed building or equipment which the salvage yard is being or
is to be operated with, conform to the requirements of Chapter
739, the Building Code, and the Zoning Code.
 
   (d)   The Health Commissioner shall recommend that the license be issued
only if he finds that the existing or proposed premises and equipment conform
to the requirements of Chapter
739 and all applicable health laws and health ordinances which the Health
Commissioner has jurisdiction to enforce.  The Health Commissioner may qualify
a recommendation that a salvage yard license be issued  by requesting that the
salvage yard license be made subject to conditions inserted in the license that
the licensee maintain compliance with a plan adopted by both the Health
Commissioner and the licensee to achieve the licensee's compliance with such
health laws and health ordinances as the Health Commissioner enforces and which
the licensee is not in full compliance with.
(Ord. 98-311.  Passed 9-8-98.)
 
   (e)   The Chief of the Fire Division shall recommend that the license be
issued only if he finds that the existing or proposed premises and  equipment
conform to the requirements of Chapter
739 and all applicable fire prevention laws and fire prevention ordinances of
the City.
 
   (f)   No salvage yard operator's license shall be issued unless all members
of the Licensing Board recommend that the license be issued.  If any member of
the Board recommends that a license not be issued, the Chairman shall
immediately notify all of the members of the Board and shall also notify the
applicant, in writing, of such disapproval and the grounds therefor, and
simultaneously therewith the Chairman shall set the matter for a hearing before
the Licensing Board on the question of whether or not the license should be
issued.  The Chairman shall give notice in writing of the date, time, and place
of such hearing to the members of the Licensing Board and to the applicant, and
such hearing shall be held within forty-five days after the filing of the
application.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the members of the Board shall
vote on whether the Board shall recommend that a license be issued.
 
   (g)   If all of the members of the Licensing Board recommend that a license
be issued, of if after the hearing described in subsection (f) hereof, a
majority of the members of the Board recommend that a license be issued, the
Chairman shall so notify the Department of Development within thirty days after
the filing of the application, and request the Community Development Department
to issue a salvage yard operator's license to the applicant if he finds:
      (1)   That the applicant has obtained a Certificate of Occupancy to the
effect that the salvage yard will not be in violation of the Fire Code,
Building Code and the Zoning Code; and
      (2)   That the applicant has paid the fees, if any are due, provided for
in the Building and Zoning Codes and in this chapter.
         (Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
   (h)   The Chairman shall not request that a salvage yard operator's license
be issued to the applicant if he finds:
      (1)   That the applicant has knowingly attempted to obtain his license
through any fraud or misstatement; or
      (2)   That the business or activity is no longer being operated or
carried on.
 
   (i)   The license as issued shall bear the following language on its face:
"IMPORTANT.  This license applies only to the premises indicated herein and
authorizes the licensee to operate a salvage yard in a lawful place and manner
only; it is not a substitute for, nor is it in lieu of, any Certificate of
Occupancy, building permit, or any other certificate or permit that is now or
may hereafter be required by law or ordinance, and it does not relieve the
licensee of the responsibility to have all such required permits or
certificates at all times and comply with all laws and ordinances affecting the
above described business."
 
   (j)   The license as issued may have included thereon, in writing, such
conditions as the Health Commissioner recommended in providing his qualified
recommendation that a salvage license be issued to the applicant.
(Ord. 98-311.  Passed 9-8-98.)
 
   (k)   The Community Development Department shall keep a record of all
applications filed and all licenses issued in accordance with this section.
(Ord.  94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
739.08  PERIOD OF LICENSE.
   (a)   All applications for a license to be issued under the provisions of
Section
739.07, shall be filed with the Chairman of the Licensing Board not less than
sixty days prior to the date the applicant desires the license to become
effective.
 
   (b)   Any license issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its
issuance and shall expire December 31, next following the issuance of the
license.
(Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
739.09  LICENSE FEES.
   The annual fees to be paid for the salvage yard operator's license issued
under Chapter
739, shall be as follows:
   (a)   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first acre, plus fifty dollars
($50.00) for each additional acre or part thereof of salvage yard space.
   (b)   Of the fees stated in subsection (a) hereof, the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) will be treated as an "application fee" and shall be paid by the
applicant at the time the application for a license is filed with the Chairman
of the Licensing Board.  This "application fee" will be used by the City to
defray the costs of investigation and processing the application and is not
refundable.  The balance of the fees stated in subsection (a) hereof shall be
paid at the time a license is issued to the applicant.
   (c)   If the license is issued, or is to become effective on or after July
1, in any given year for the remainder of that year, the license fee shall be
one-half of the above stated fees, but in all cases the "application fee" shall
remain as set forth herein and shall not be abated or proportionately reduced.
      (Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
739.10  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued under Chapter
739 shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one
to whom it was issued, and no salvage yard operator's license shall be used for
any premises other than those described in the application upon which it was
issued.
(Ord. 88-318.  Passed 5-31-88.)
 
739.11  GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The following general operating requirements shall apply to all
salvage yards and salvage yard operators:
      (1)   The license issued pursuant to Section
739.07 shall be plainly displayed on the business premises at all times;
      (2)   Any space or land area not described in the license shall not be
used in the licensed business;
      (3)   Should any place on the premises become a breeding place for
mosquitoes, the salvage yard operator shall have the place sprayed with an
insecticide so as to eliminate the mosquito nuisance;
      (4)   No garbage or rubbish shall be kept or permitted to accumulate and
remain on the premises in violation of Chapter
919;
      (5)   No salvage shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude into any ublic
right-of-way, fire lane, or become scattered or blown off the business
premises;
      (6)   Combustible salvage material, including tires, shall be placed or
stored at least fifteen feet from a required outside fence and any building;
      (7)   No salvage shall be placed, stored or offered for sale outside of
any required fence;
      (8)   A fire lane eighteen feet in width shall be maintained from the
main entrance throughout an outside salvage yard, so that no point of the
salvage yard shall be more than 200 feet from a fire lane.  No salvage shall be
deposited within thirty inches of a required fence.
      (9)   Every salvage yard, together with the things kept therein, shall be
maintained so as to be free from vermin, rats, fire hazards, public nuisances
and all other conditions harmful to the public health, safety or welfare;
      (10)   Required fences and gates shall be maintained so as to prevent
dilapidation, rusting, rotting, leaning, or other deterioration;
      (11)   Gasoline shall be removed from any engines or vehicles, qualifying
as salvage, on the premises;
      (12)   No salvage shall be burned on the premises except in a manner
approved by law;
      (13)   The area on the premises where salvage is kept (other than
indoors) which has a boundary line which is common to that of any public road,
street or highway or which is adjacent to any improved premises occupied or
utilized for other than industrial uses or purposes, shall be obscured from the
ordinary view of any person passing upon any such public road, street or
highway and of any person upon any such adjacent premises with a non-
transparent wall or fence of uniform material and uniform height with a minimum
height of eight feet measured from ground level and a maximum height of ten
feet measured from ground level.  No advertisement shall be permitted on the
wall or fence other than the name of the person under whose name the license
has been issued and the nature of the business conducted herein; provided,
however that all such signage shall conform to City ordinances governing
signage.  Entrances and exits shall not be wider than thirty feet and shall be
equipped with a nontransparent gate or gates made of sturdy material;
      (14)   The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by
any member or representative of the City at any reasonable time;
      (15)   Each purchase or receipt of salvage shall be recorded in legible
English in a prenumbered register kept on the licensed premises or such other
format as is approved by the Chief of Police.  The register shall contain all
of the following:
         A.   The name and address of the seller,
         B.   An identification number taken from an identification card issued
by a governmental agency to the seller, such as a driver’s license, or a
photocopy of such a card,
         C.   A description of the salvage acquired,
         D.   The vehicle identification number of any motor vehicle, or motor
vehicle part(s) being received as salvage bearing a vehicle identification
number,
         E.   The date and time of the transaction, and
         F.   The license number of the seller’s vehicle when reasonably
obtainable.
The register shall be kept current through the end of the previous business
day.  The register shall be available for inspection at the licensed premises
by a member or representative of the Licensing Board for a period of at least
one year from the date of purchase or receipt.  Each business day, each salvage
yard operator shall make a copy of the register, complete through the end of
the prior business day, available to the Chief of Police.  In lieu of making a
copy of the register available to the Chief of Police, a salvage yard operator
may electronically transmit the information described above to the Police
Division in such format as the Chief of Police may approve.  A salvage yard
operator is not required to record a purchase of salvage which includes only
beverage cans and bottles. 
         (Ord. 07-41.  Passed 2-15-07.)
      (16)   The salvage yard shall be operated in such a manner that all
loading, unloading, and working of the salvage piles, and the equipment
involved therein, shall be done entirely within the confines of the licensed
premises as shown on the plot plan described in Section
739.06(b)(5);
      (17)   A sign constructed of durable material and announcing a telephone
number where a responsible representative of the salvage yard operator can be
reached after business hours shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
primary entrance to the premises.
 
   (b)   The Community Development Director, with the assistance of the
director of such other department or departments as may be appropriate, shall
cause such inspections to be made as necessary to insure compliance with the
general operating requirements herein provided.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
739.12  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The license of a salvage yard operator may be suspended for a period
of time specified by the Licensing Board or revoked by the Licensing Board for
failure to comply with the provisions of Chapter
739 or on the basis that the Health Commissioner has certified to the Licensing
Board the  licensee is not complying with the conditions included in his
license pursuant to subsection
739.07(j).  However, such suspension or revocation shall not take place until
the Chairman of the Licensing Board shall have first notified the salvage yard
operator, calling specific attention to the infraction of Chapter
739 and/or that the Health Commissioner has certified to the Licensing Board
the  licensee is not complying with the conditions included in his license
pursuant to subsection
739.07(j) and affording a minimum of fifteen days to correct such infractions,
except in the case of an emergency order as hereinafter provided.  Such notice
shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the subsections
violated, and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of such subsection and/or a statement that the Health
Commissioner has certified to the Licensing Board that the  licensee is not
complying with the conditions included in his license pursuant to subsection
739.07(j);
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for compliance, except in the case of an
emergency order as hereinafter provided;
      (4)   Advise the salvage yard operator of the procedure for appeal;
      (5)   Be served upon the salvage yard operator.  Such notice and order
shall be deemed to be properly served upon such salvage yard operator if a copy
thereof is sent by certified or registered mail to such salvage yard operator
at the address on file with the Community Development Department or as stated
in the salvage yard operator's application and a copy of the notice is posted
in a conspicuous place in or on the premises.
         (Ord. 98-311.  Passed 9-8-98.)
 
   (b)   Whenever the Chairman of the Licensing Board finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the health and safety of the
public or the health and safety of the employees of a salvage yard operator, he
may, after having made a good faith effort to give the salvage yard operator at
least one hour advance notice of his intended action issue an order reciting
the existence of the emergency and suspend forthwith the license of a salvage
yard operator.  Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, any such order or
order shall be effective immediately and complied within the time and manner
prescribed in the emergency order.
(Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
739.13  HEARINGS.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by a notice, order or both of the Licensing Board
which has been issued as provided in Section
739.12 may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Licensing Board.  However, such person shall file with the Community
Development Department a written request for such hearing and set forth the
name and address and telephone number of the operator and a brief statement of
the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any
order of the Licensing Board.  The written request shall be filed within ten
days after the date of the notice and order of the Licensing Board.  Upon
receipt of such a request, the Chairman of the Licensing Board shall set a time
and place for a hearing before the Licensing Board and shall give the operator
written notice thereof.  The hearing shall be commenced within a reasonable
time after a request has been filed.  At such hearing, the salvage yard
operator shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why any
item appearing on such notice and order should be modified or withdrawn.  The
failure of the salvage yard operator or his representative to appear and state
his case at such hearing shall have the same effect as if request was not
filed.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
   (b)   After a hearing, the Licensing Board may sustain, modify or withdraw
any item appearing on the notice and order by majority vote, depending upon its
findings as to whether the provisions of Chapter
739 have been complied with, and the salvage yard operator shall be notified in
writing of such findings.  The decision of the Licensing Board shall be issued
within forty-five days of the conclusion of the hearing.
 
   (c)   The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision
of the Licensing Board, and reasons therefor, shall be summarized and reduced
to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Community Development Director.  Such record shall also include a copy of every
notice and order issued in connection with the matter.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
739.14  FORMER SALVAGE YARDS.
   (a)   The Chairman of the Licensing Board shall issue an order to any owner
of a salvage yard, which is not licensed pursuant to this chapter, to obtain a
Salvage Yard Operator's License.
 
   (b)   Every owner of a salvage yard who receives an order from the Chairman
of the Licensing Board, pursuant to this section, and fails to obtain or is
ineligible to obtain a Salvage Operator's License shall, within 150 days of
receiving the order remove all salvage from his salvage yard which may become a
harbor for vermin or rats, may constitute a fire hazard or other public
nuisance or may contribute to any other condition harmful to the public health,
safety or welfare.  All ground within the former salvage yard shall be leveled
so as to prevent water from collecting in such a manner as to afford a breeding
place for mosquitoes.
(Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
739.15  INJUNCTION.
   In addition to other remedies which the City may have to enforce this
chapter, the City may also seek a court injunction against continued violation
of this chapter and any order issued pursuant thereto.
(Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
739.99  PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided, whoever violates any provision of this
chapter, or any rule, regulation or order issued thereunder, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord.  88-318.  Passed  5-31-88.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 741
Peddlers
 
741.01   License required.
741.02   Application information.
741.03   Investigation; license issuance and record.
741.04   Posting and exhibition of license.
741.05   Fees.
741.06   Loud noises and speaking devices.
741.07   Duty of police to enforce.
741.08   Revocation of license; hearing.
741.09   Expiration of license.
741.10   Exceptions and license renewal.
741.11   Exemptions.
741.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to inspect food products--see Ohio R.C. 715.46
Power to regulate--see Ohio R.C. 715.61 et seq.
Home solicitation sales--see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
Charitable solicitations--see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716
Trespassing--see Ohio R.C. 2911.21
Frozen desserts--see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
Littering--see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Advertising by handbills--see BUS. REG. Ch.
705
 
741.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or exchange any goods, wares or
merchandise or secure or attempt to secure, orders or contracts for the
furnishing of goods or services, or advertising goods, wares, or merchandise by
distributing samples thereof or premiums either upon the streets, alleys, or
public grounds of the City, or from door to door or place to place within the
City without having obtained a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.02  APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   Applicants for a license under this chapter, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall file with the Chief of Police a written sworn application
signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership and
by the president if a corporation.  The application shall show the following:
   (a)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business and of each person who will be engaged
in such business within the City during the time that it is proposed that it
will be carried on in the City; the local address or addresses of such person
or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses
of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will
act (whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the
person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on,
if any; and, if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is
incorporated;
   (b)   The fingerprints and photograph of the person or persons having the
management or supervision of the applicant's business and of each person who
will be engaged in such business within the City;
   (c)   The place or places in the City where it is proposed to carry on the
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that
such business shall be conducted;
   (d)   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of
such application conducted any such business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which
such business was conducted;
   (e)   Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business, or any person who will be engaged in
such business within the City have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or
the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the
punishment assessed therefor;
   (f)   Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative; and
   (g)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the Chief of Police
may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the
public good.
      (Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.03  INVESTIGATION; LICENSE ISSUANCE AND RECORD.
   (a)   Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral
character to be made as he deems necessary to the protection of the public
good.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and
business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall
be denied.  If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
reputation do not appear to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall so
certify in writing, and a license shall be issued by the Chief of Police.
 
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall keep a full record in his office of all
licenses issued.  Such record shall contain the number of the license, the date
the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the
amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of such license, the place
where the business may be carried on under such license, and the name or names
of the person or persons authorized to carry on the same.
 
   (c)   Licenses issued under this Chapter are not transferable.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.04  POSTING AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business if any is named therein.  In the event that an applicant for
a license shall desire to do business in more than one place within the City,
separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted
conspicuously in each place of business.  Each person engaged in such business,
conduct or activity, shall obtain a separate copy of such license and, while
engaged in such business, conduct or activity, shall carry such license with
him and shall exhibit the same upon request of any person.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.05  FEES.
   Licensees under this chapter shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00).  An additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for each
additional copy of any such license.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.06  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make
any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including
any loud speaking radio or amplifying system, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which such licensee
proposes to sell or furnish, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other
public places of the City, or upon any private premises in the City where sound
of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly
heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.07  DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE.
   The police officers of the City shall examine all places of business and
persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this
chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING.
   (a)   The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Chief of Police after notice and hearing for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise, or the furnishing of services;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
 
   (b)   Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing.  Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.09  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire ninety
days after the date of issuance thereof unless a prior date is fixed therein.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.10  EXCEPTIONS AND LICENSE RENEWAL.
   No renewal of any license required by this chapter shall be required so long
as the licensee shall remain continuously engaged in business within the City,
following the expiration of any such license previously obtained.  However,
cessation or discontinuance of such business in the City for a continuous
period of more than thirty days shall necessitate the renewal of any such
license and the payment of the prescribed fee therefor prior to the
reinstitution of such business.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.11  EXEMPTIONS.
   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (a)   Any owner of any product of his own raising or the manufacturer of any
article manufactured by him or the agent of any such owner or manufacturer;
   (b)   Any charitable, benevolent or educational organization or corporation,
or the agent or employee thereof engaged only in temporary or occasional
projects for the obtaining of funds for use in furtherance of such charitable,
benevolent or educational purposes;
   (c)   Any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business or
activity described in Section
741.01 only at the invitation or request of the persons with whom such business
is transacted.
      (Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
741.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 05-173.  Passed 6-28-05.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 743
Pawnbrokers
 
743.01   Definitions.
743.02   Obligation of pawnbrokers.
743.03   Exception.
743.04   Compliance.
743.99   Penalty.
 
743.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "Pawnbroker" means any person engaged in the business of lending money
on deposit or pledges of personal property, other than securities, printed
evidence of indebtedness, titles, deeds, or bills of sale, at a total charge,
rate of interest, or discount or other remuneration in excess of eight percent
per annum, and includes any person engaged in the business of purchasing
personal property from another person with an agreement that the personal
property will be made available to that other person for repurchase within an
agreed-to time period and for an amount greater than the price originally paid
to that other person for the purchase of the personal property.
 
   (b)   “Transaction” as used in this chapter means the acceptance of
merchandise as security for a loan, for resale, or on consignment.
 
743.02  OBLIGATION OF PAWNBROKERS.
   Every pawnbroker doing business in The City of Springfield, Ohio, shall:
   (a)   have and maintain a secure internet connection, and
   (b)   provide to the Chief of Police or his designee an electronic record of
each transaction. The electronic records shall:
      (1)   be submitted through an electronic reporting service furnished by
the City at no cost to the pawnbroker.
      (2)   include a photograph of all merchandise accepted for pawn,
purchased for resale, or consignment, and such other data as is called for by
the electronic reporting service.
      (3)   be submitted as soon as practicable after the completion of the
transaction, but in no case later than the close of business on the day of the
transaction.
 
743.03  EXCEPTION.
   In the event the electronic reporting system malfunctions or is otherwise
not operational, the pawnbroker shall, at all times during such malfunction or
non-operation, keep written records of any and all transactions that would have
otherwise been entered in the electronic reporting system and shall submit such
records to the Chief of Police or his designee within twenty-four hours of such
transaction during the non-operational period. The written records shall
contain all information required on the electronic reporting system.
 
743.04  COMPLIANCE.
   Compliance with the obligations set out in this chapter fulfills the
obligation to provide daily reports set out in Ohio Revised Code Section
4727.09.
 
743.99  PENALTY.
   Any pawnbroker or any managing agent of a pawnbroker entity who fails or
refuses to fulfill the obligations set forth in this chapter is guilty of a
first degree misdemeanor.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 749
Public Utilities
 
749.01   Meter reader's badge required.
749.02   Use of electric lamp or flashlight only.
749.03   Pole and wire requirements.
749.04   Removal of poles if conditions not complied with.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate electricity equipment--see Ohio R.C. 715.27
City consent for electrical fixtures and lines on public  property--see Ohio
R.C. 715.27, 4933.13, 4933.16
City consent for telephone fixtures and lines of public  property--see Ohio
R.C. 4931.20, 4931.23
Gas, electric and water companies--see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
City consent for water fixtures on public property--see  Ohio R.C. 4933.01
City consent for gas fixtures on public property--see Ohio  R.C. 4933.01,
4933.03
Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized  connections--see
Ohio R.C. 4933.22
 
749.01  METER READER'S BADGE REQUIRED.
   All persons engaged in the business of reading or inspecting water, gas or
electric meters shall wear a badge or other insignia which shall indicate
thereon the authority of the person to read or inspect such meters.
(Ord. 1504. Passed7-11-21.)
 
749.02  USE OF ELECTRIC LAMP OR FLASHLIGHT ONLY.
   No person employed by or representing any person or corporation owning or
operating any system of gas works and pipes for the purpose of supplying gas,
natural or artificial, to the residents of the City shall use any light during
the inspection or reading of any meter used in connection with the business of
the person or corporation, other than an electric lamp or flashlight.
(Ord. 1504. Passed 7-11-21.)
749.03  POLE AND WIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person, company, or association shall in constructing, extending, or
erecting any line or telegraph erect-any pole or poles unless the same shall be
at least forty-five feet in length and the wires placed upon such poles so as
to be at least thirty feet from the surface of the ground, and unless the poles
are of cedar or chestnut timber, or the equivalent thereto in strength and
durability, and reasonably straight, dressed and painted at least to a height
of forty feet, or the entire length of the poles aboveground. All work done in
erecting, extending or constructing such lines shall be done under the
direction of the Director of Public Service.
(1907 Code Sec. 351)
 
749.04  REMOVAL OF POLES IF CONDITIONS NOT COMPLIED WITH.
   Every person or company or association to whom the City Commission shall
grant the right or privilege of erecting, constructing or extending any
telegraph line or of erecting any telegraph poles for the purpose of
constructing, extending or erecting any line of telegraph through, over or
across the streets or alleys of the City, who shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall forfeit all right and privilege so as
aforesaid granted, and the privilege so granted shall be null and void. The
Commission may order such person, company or association to remove from the
streets and alleys the telegraph poles, and cause the telegraph line to be
removed within such time as the Commission may by resolution or ordinance
prescribe.
(1907 Code Sec. 353)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 765
Taxicabs
 
CHAPTER REPEALED
PASSED FEBRUARY 16, 2016
 
 
 
CHAPTER 769
Used Motor Vehicles and Parts
 
769.01   Information; sign and book.
769.02   Tag.
769.03   Report to Police Chief.
769.04   Concealing or destroying identity of vehicle prohibited.
769.05   Minor or apprentice.
769.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate secondhand dealers—see Ohio R.C. 715.61
Receiving stolen property—see Ohio R.C. 2961.03
Secondhand dealers—see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4737
Record of transactions required—see Ohio R.C. 4737.01, 4737.04
Dealing with minors prohibited; hours regulated—see Ohio R.C. 4737.03
Salvage yard operators—see BUS. REG. Ch.
739
 
769.01  INFORMATION; SIGN AND BOOK.
   Each and every person, firm, or corporation purchasing, selling, exchanging,
or receiving used or secondhand motor vehicles, parts, or accessories thereof
shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a sign having his
name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, and keep a separate book, open
to inspection to members of the police force or other persons, in which book
shall be written the name and description of the motor vehicle or part thereof
purchased, sold, or exchanged, the factory number of the machine or part, the
number of the engine, the name, description, and residence of the person from
whom purchased and received and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange
was made.  Each entry shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with number
one.
(Ord. 1943.  Passed 7-14-24.)
 
769.02  TAG.
   Such articles so purchased or exchanged as provided in Section
769.01 shall be retained by the purchaser thereof for a least three days before
disposing of them, in an accessible place in the building where such articles
are purchased or received.  A tag shall be attached to such motor vehicle, or
part thereof, in some visible and convenient place, with the number written
thereon corresponding to the entry number in the book.
(Ord. 1943.  Passed 7-14-24.)
 
769.03  REPORT TO POLICE CHIEF.
   Each and every person, firm, or corporation purchasing, selling, exchanging,
or receiving used or secondhand motor vehicles, parts or accessories thereof
shall prepare and deliver to the Police Chief on or before 12:00 noon of the
next day following, a legible and correct copy from such book entries, showing
the description of the motor vehicle or part thereof purchased, sold, or
exchanged, the factory number of the machine and engine, the name, description,
and place of residence of the person from whom purchased or exchanged.
(Ord. 1943.  Passed 7-14-24.)
 
769.04  CONCEALING OR DESTROYING IDENTITY OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   No serial number or any other distinguishing identification mark upon any
motor vehicle, engine, or part thereof, by the manufacturer or owner, shall be
removed, defaced, covered, or destroyed for the purpose of concealing or
destroying the identity of the motor vehicle or part thereof.
(Ord. 1943.  Passed 7-14-24.)
 
769.05  MINOR OR APPRENTICE.
   No person shall purchase or receive, buy, sell, barter, or exchange any of
the property mentioned in the preceding sections, of a minor or apprentice
knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
(Ord. 1943.  Passed 7-14-24.)
 
769.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who violates any clause or
provision of this chapter, or who assists in such violation or noncompliance,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Each and every day’s
continued violation of this chapter, or any provision thereof, shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 771
Garage Sales
 
771.01   Definitions.
771.02   Property permitted to be sold.
771.03   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.04   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.05   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.06   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.07   Limits on sales.
771.08   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.09   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.10   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.11   Signs.
771.12   Inspection; closure, authority of Business Licensing Officer.
771.13   Repealed by Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.
771.14   Persons exempted.
771.15   Separate violations.
771.16   Violation citation tags.
771.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate transient dealers - see Ohio R. C. 715.64
Littering - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Handbill distribution - see BUS. REG. Ch.
705
 
771.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular
number, the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   (a)   "Garage sale" means and includes all general sales, open to the public
conducted from or on any premises used for residential purposes, for the
purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all
sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard,"
"patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale.  This definition shall not include a
situation where no more than one (1) vehicle, for which a state certificate of
title or other form of state registration has been issued to a resident of such
premises, is held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically
names the vehicle to be sold.
      (Ord. 90-608.  Passed 11-13-90.)
   (b)   "Personal property" means property which is owned, utilized, and
maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in
the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence.  It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
      (Ord. 85-294.  Passed 5-28-85.)
 
771.02  PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD.
   No individual shall sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this
chapter, property other than personal property.
(Ord. 82-191.  Passed 5-4-82.)
 
771.03  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.04  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.05  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.06  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.07  LIMITS ON SALES.
   Such garage sales shall be limited in time to the hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. for three consecutive days.  No more than two such sales may be
conducted at any individual residence and/or family household during any
calendar year.
(Ord. 00-428, effective 1-2-01.)
 
771.08  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.09  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.10  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.11  SIGNS.
   No more than two signs of not more than four square feet each shall be
displayed advertising a garage sale.  Such signs shall not be displayed
anywhere other than the premises where such sale shall be held, shall be
displayed only on the day or days of such sale and the two days immediately
preceding thereof, and shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the last day of such
sale.
 
771.12  INSPECTION; CLOSURE, AUTHORITY OF BUSINESS LICENSING OFFICER.
   Upon inspection, any garage sale found to be operating in violation of this
chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance may be closed by the Business
Licensing Officer or other public official responsible for the enforcement of
such law or ordinance.
(Ord. 82-191.  Passed 5-4-82.)
 
771.13  REPEALED BY ORD. 00-428, EFFECTIVE 1-2-01.
 
771.14  PERSONS EXEMPTED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
   (a)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order to process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
 
771.15  SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
   Every sale of an article and every day a sale is conducted in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 82-191.  Passed 5-4-82.)
 
771.16  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS.
   The Community Development Director is authorized and directed to provide
inspectors with citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due
notice and summons to the person responsible for violations of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (a)   Such citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the sections of the chapter violated,
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place, and it shall be made
on oath before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
   (b)   The citation tag shall be served on such person in person.  However,
this citation shall be deemed to be properly served upon the person if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, or a copy is posed in a conspicuous
place in or on the dwelling where the garage sale is held.  If a registered or
certified mail envelope is returned with an endorsement showing that service
was refused, the notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known
mailing address, residence, or place of business.  The mailing shall be
evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on
the date of mailing.  If the registered or certified mail envelope is returned
with an endorsement showing that service was unclaimed, the notice may be
served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address, residence, or place
of business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing, provided that the
ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery.
   (c)   The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of appearing
at the time and place stated, he may, within that stated time, appear
personally at the office of the Clerk of Municipal Court and on signing a plea
of guilty and a waiver of trial, pay a stated fine and stated costs, if any. 
The citation shall inform the defendant that he may be arrested if he fails to
appear either at the Clerk's office or at the time and place stated in the
citation.
   (d)   When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for the arrest of that person.
   (e)   When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed in accordance with Rule 5 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   The citation tag as herein provided shall be sufficient notice,
summons, and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
that the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
      (Ord. 90-626.  Passed 11-27-90.)
 
771.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  Any violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
(Ord. 90-626.  Passed 11-27-90.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 775
Ice Cream Trucks
 
775.01   Purpose.
775.02   Definitions.
775.03   Registration of Driver or Operator.
775.04   Restrictions and Requirements.
775.99   Penalty.
 
NOTE:    This chapter was repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ord. 20-28
passed February 11, 2020.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate peddlers - see Ohio R.C. 715.61 et seq.
Power to regulate transient dealers - see Ohio R.C. 715.64
Frozen desserts - see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
Displaying vehicles for sale on roadway - see TRAF.
351.06
Loudspeakers - see GEN. OFF.
509.09
Peddlers - see BUS. REG. Ch.
741
 
775.01    PURPOSE.
   The City of Springfield, City Commission finds that vehicles in which ice
cream, confections and other frozen dessert products are carried for purposes
of retail sale on the public streets pose special dangers to the public health,
safety and welfare of children and residents in the City of Springfield, Ohio. 
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Springfield, in enacting this
article, to provide responsible companies and individuals who engage in
operation of ice cream trucks with clear and concise regulations to prevent
safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety
and welfare of the community.
 
775.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter:
   (a)   "Ice Cream Truck"  means any vehicle or motor vehicle, as that term is
defined in the Ohio Revised Code Chapter 4511.01, which is equipped or
primarily used for retail sales on any public street, alley or highway within
the City of Springfield of ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, sherbets, frozen
yogurt, frozen dessert products and confections of any kind.  The inventory of
these vehicles is not necessarily limited to ice cream, confections or frozen
dessert products.
   (b)   "Frozen Dessert Product" includes ice cream, ice milk, popsicles,
frozen yogurt, confections, and chilled desserts of any kind.
   (c)   "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, and stockholder and includes, but is not limited to, owners,
operations drivers, lessors and lessees of ice cream trucks.
   (d)   "Vend or Vending" means offering frozen dessert products of any kind
for sale from a motor vehicle on a street, alley, highway or public place
within the City of Springfield and includes the movement or standing of an ice
cream truck for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail
sales of frozen dessert products.
   (e)   "Ice cream vendor" means any person, as defined in this article, who:
      (1)   Conducts or permits or causes the operation of ice cream trucks;
      (2)   Owns, operates, controls, manages or leases ice cream trucks; or
      (3)   Contracts with persons to drive and vend from ice cream trucks.
   (f)   "Operator" means any person who drives, operates or vends from an ice
cream truck and shall include the driver and assistant on each ice cream truck.
   (g)   "Registration Certificate" means a certificate issued by the chief of
police for the City of Springfield subject to the requirements of Section
775.03.
 
775.03    REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate any vehicle within the City for the
purpose of selling, or offering for sale, from such vehicle, frozen dessert
product, without having a current certificate of registration obtained, upon
application, from the office of the Chief of Police.
 
   (b)   Such certificate of registration shall be effective for a period of
one year from the date of its issuance, and shall be issued upon payment of a
registration fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the filing of a written
application setting forth the following information:
      (1)   Applicant's name, residence, and business address, social security
number, and driver's license number.
      (2)   A description of the nature of the products to be sold by the
applicant.
      (3)   A description of any vehicle to be operated by applicant in the
course of such selling, or offering for sale, including, if a motor vehicle,
the make, model, year, and manufacturer's serial number.
 
   (c)    Any person having a current peddler's license issued pursuant to
Chapter
741 is hereby exempted from the requirements of this section.
 
775.04    RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person or operator shall stop an ice cream truck for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale any frozen dessert products, or to sell or offer
for sale such products at such ice cream truck while stopped, or to use any
loudspeaker, bell, or other device giving an audible signal to advertise frozen
dessert products, on any street or public right-of-way abutting any real estate
which is then used as part of the school grounds of any public or private grade
or junior high school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on days
when such school is in session.
 
   (b)   No person or operator of any ice cream truck shall use more than one
loudspeaker, bell, or other device, and such loudspeaker, bell, or other device
shall not have the capability or capacity to emit a signal louder than eighty
decibels at full volume measured at any distance from such device for the
purpose of advertising to the general public the product, or presence of the
ice cream truck.
 
   (c)     No person or operator of any ice cream truck from and at which
frozen dessert products are being sold shall use any loudspeaker, bell, or
other device giving an audible signal to advertise such products or the
presence of the vehicle while the ice cream truck is in motion.
 
   (d)     No person or operator of any ice cream truck shall stop such ice
cream truck for the purpose of selling or offering for sale frozen dessert
products without having the following equipment mounted on the ice cream truck
and in operation during the period of selling frozen dessert products:
      (1)   There shall be two warning lights.  Each warning light shall be
double-faced, yellow in color, and not less than six inches in diameter.  One
light shall be mounted on the roof near the left center of the roof line, and
the other light shall be mounted on the roof near the right center of the roof
line. 
      (2)   When operating, the lights shall flash and be clearly visible from
both the front and rear at a distance of at least 300 feet. 
      (3)   The lights shall be operated when the motor vehicle is stopped for
the purpose of selling or offering for sale any food products and at no other
time.
      (4)   There shall be two warning signs.  Each warning sign shall carry
the legend "CHILDREN" on the top line and "PROCEED WITH CAUTION" on the bottom
line in five-inch, black, block letters on a yellow background. 
      (5)   The signs shall be a minimum of fifty inches in width and twenty
inches in height.  One sign shall be located on the front end of the vehicle,
and the other located on the rear end of the vehicle.
      (6)   The signs shall not extend more than two feet above nor two feet
below the top roof line of the vehicle. 
      (7)   The signs shall be located transversely so as not to obstruct the
two warning lights. 
      (8)   The signs shall form a complete warning unit with the two warning
lights that can be clearly visible by motorists who approach such vehicle from
the front and rear.

   (e)   No motorist, when approaching a ice cream truck from any direction at
a time when such ice cream truck has the yellow warning lights operating, shall
fail to proceed with caution to pass such ice cream truck.
 
   (f)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any frozen dessert products
from an ice cream truck unless that ice cream truck is legally parked, or shall
sell or offer for sale from other than the curbside of the legally parked ice
cream truck.
 
   (g)   No person shall engage in selling or offering for sale frozen desserts
from and at an ice cream truck between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
 
775.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.

 
 
CHAPTER 776
Food Trucks
 
 
 
776.01   Purpose.
776.02   Definitions.
776.03   Registration Requirements.
776.04   General Requirements.
776.05   Product for Sale.
776.06   Exemptions.
775.99   Penalty.
 
 
NOTE:   This chapter was enacted by Ord. No. 20-29 passed February 11, 2020.
 
 
776.01   PURPOSE.
   The Springfield City Commission finds that vehicles in which the production
and distribution of food for retail sale on the public streets pose special
dangers to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents in the City
of Springfield, Ohio.  It is the purpose and intent of the City of Springfield,
in enacting this article, to provide responsible companies and individuals who
engage in the operation of food trucks with clear and concise regulations to
prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace,
safety and welfare of the community.
 
776.02   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter:
   (a)    "Food" means raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient intended for use or for sale in whole or part for human
consumption. 
   (b)   "Mobile Food Service License and Mobile Food Establishment License"
means the official document issued by the Clark County Combined Health District
or any other Health District in the State of Ohio possessing the appropriate
licensing authority with allows the operation of a food truck in Clark County.
   (c)   "Food Truck"  means a vehicle or vehicle and trailer propelled by an
engine which has been specifically designated or used for mobile food vending.
   (d)   "Vend or Vending" means offering for sale food of any kind for sale
from a food truck on a street, alley, highway or public place within the City
of Springfield.
 
776.03   REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall offer for sale any food from any food truck within the
City of Springfield without a current and valid Mobile Food Service or Mobile
Food Establishment License issued by the Clark County Combined Health District
or other health departments in the State of Ohio possessing the appropriate
licensing authority.
 
   (b)   A Mobile Food Service or Mobile Food Establishment License must be
clearly and conspicuously displayed on the food truck during all times of
operation for inspection by the Clark County Combined Health District and City
of Springfield officials.
 
   (c)   All food trucks shall be subject to inspections during operation by
the Community Development Department for compliance with local and state code
and regulations.
 
   (d)   All food trucks must display their Mobile Food License or Mobile Food
Establishment license plainly in the view of the public.
 
776.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All food trucks operating in the City of Springfield must keep the
surrounding area immediately adjacent to the food truck clean and must dispose
of all waste generation from the operation.
 
   (b)   No food trucks may discharge waste water, sewage, or grease into the
city storm water or sewage drainage system.
 
   (c)   No food truck shall utilize loud speakers or other noise-making
devices in such way to create a nuisance, or in violation of the City's
Ordinances.
 
   (d)   No food truck shall operate within 75 feet of a brick and mortar
restaurant located in the City of Springfield.
 
776.05  PRODUCTS FOR SALE.
   Food trucks shall only offer food for sale.
 
776.06   EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   This Chapter shall not apply during sanctioned special events
occurring in the City of Springfield pursuant to a valid event permit.
 
   (b)   This Chapter does not apply to invitations on private property
extended by the owner or authorized representative of that property.
 
776.99   PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a Class A Civil
Fine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART NINE—STREETS, UTILITIES, AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
 
TITLE ONE - Streets and Sidewalk Areas
Chap.   
901.   Improvements and Excavations.
Chap.   
902.   Right-of-Way Use Management.
Chap.   
903.   Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
Chap.   
905.   Vacation or Narrowing of Streets.
Chap.   
907.   Trees.
Chap.   
909.   Weeds.
Chap.   
910.   Building Numbering.
 
TITLE THREE - Municipal Utilities
Chap.   
911.   Water Rates and Regulations.
Chap.   
913.   Cross Connection Control and Water Quality Protection.
Chap.   
915.   Sewer Connections.
Chap.   
916.   Use of Public Sewers.
Chap.   
917.   Sewerage Charges.
Chap.   
918.   Stormwater Utility Charges.
Chap.   
919.   Sanitary Services.
Chap.   
921.   Private Solid Waste Collectors.
Chap.   
922.   Residential Solid Waste Collectors.
Chap.   
923.   Demolition Dumps.
Chap.   
925.   Collection and Disposal of Storm Waters.
Chap.   
927.   Utilities Serving New Condominium Developments.
Chap.   
929.   Wellhead and Well Field Protection Regulations.
 
TITLE FOUR - Engineering Regulations
Chap.   
931.   Public Infrastructure Improvements.
 
TITLE FIVE - Other Public Services
Chap.   
955.   Fire Protection Outside City Limits.
Chap.   
959.   Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport.
 
TITLE SIX - Stormwater Regulations
Chap.   
961.   Regulations.
Chap.   
963.  Administration.
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART NINE—STREETS, UTILITIES, AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
 
TITLE ONE—Streets and Sidewalk Areas
Chap.   
901.   Improvements and Excavations.
Chap.   
902.   Right-of-Way Use Management.
Chap.   
903.   Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
Chap.   
905.   Vacation or Narrowing of Streets.
Chap.   
907.   Trees.
Chap.   
909.   Weeds.
Chap.   
910.   Building Numbering.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 901
Excavations in the Right-of-Way
 
901.01   Definitions.
901.02   Application for permit.
901.03   Conditions for issuance of permit.
901.04   Proceeding with the work.
901.05   Funds received.
901.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Improvements, contracts—see CHTR.
 Sec. 41 to
46
Power to establish and care for streets—see Ohio R.C. 715.19, 717.01, 723.01
Openings by municipality—see Ohio R.C. 723.02
Surface treatment—see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
Excavation liability—see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets—see Ohio R.C. 5589.10
 
901.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this Chapter
901, “right-of-way” includes all streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tree lawns,
or other rights-of-way dedicated for public use within the City of Springfield.
 
   (b)   As used in this Chapter
901, “excavation” includes digging, boring, and any act that disturbs surface
or subsurface conditions. Installing cable, wire, or other material into an
existing conduit is not “excavation.”  Placing or replacing a pole or guy wires
associated with a pole is not excavation.
 
   (c)   As used in this Chapter
901, "Engineer" means the Service Director or designee as set forth in Chapter
141.
(Ord. No. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
901.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (a)   Except for persons employed by or under contract with the City of
Springfield and persons issued a permit under Chapter
903 of these Codified Ordinances, no person shall make any opening or
excavation in any right-of-way or remove any pavement from any right-of-way
unless that person has applied for and been issued a permit by the City Manager
or his duly authorized agent.
 
   (b)   When an excavation or opening in any right-of-way must be made
immediately due to an emergency, including an interruption in the provision of
utility services, the application for the permit must be made as soon as is
practicable.
 
   (c)   The application shall be signed by the person who is to do such work,
and shall set forth the location, kind, and extent of any excavation, and the
name and address of the person for whose benefit the same is to be done. The
application shall state the means and methods by which the excavation will be
restored. The application shall state when the work will be performed and when
the restoration will be completed. The application shall also describe how
pedestrian and vehicular traffic will be controlled during the excavation and
restoration work.
 
   (d)   By signing the application, the applicant agrees to:
      (1)   pay the fees imposed by this Chapter
901,
      (2)   perform the work described in the permit in accordance with the
permit,
      (3)   indemnify and save the City harmless from any claim, loss, or
damage arising in any way out of such work, or which may result, directly or
indirectly, to persons or property by reason of any such improvement, or by
reason of the same not being properly guarded or protected by lights, barriers,
or otherwise, so as to prevent injury to users of the right-of-way, and
      (4)   repair or replace any work that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Engineer, has been shown to be deficient.
         (Ord. No. 17-193. Passed 8-15-17.)
 
901.03  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   No permit under this Chapter shall be issued until the applicant has
paid a permit fee and a restoration deposit to the City.
      (1)   The permit fee shall be a minimum of $100 for the first 400 lineal
feet of excavation.  If an excavation exceeds 400 lineal feet, an additional
fee of $100 is payable for each additional increment of up to 400 lineal feet.
The maximum permit fee is $1,000. 
      (2)   The restoration deposit shall be in a sum of money sufficient to
restore the street or alley as nearly as is reasonably possible to a condition
as good or better as existed prior to the opening or excavation of the street
or alley. The City Manager shall from time to time prepare and place on file in
his office and in the office of the Service Department, schedules of the
estimated costs relating to surface restoration related to permitted
excavations or disturbances. The deposit required shall be based upon such
schedules, provided that the City Manager may in any instance make special
estimates for work or materials or costs not covered by his general schedules.
      (3)   Public Utilities, as defined in Section
902.02(p), shall not be required to pay a restoration deposit.
 
   (b)   The  Applicant must be licensed pursuant to Chapter
902,
915,
1327, or
1367 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield.
 
   (c)   If the Engineer determines that means, methods, and timing described
in the application are appropriate, that the required fees are paid, the
deposit made, and that the applicant is not in default of any of its
obligations under this Chapter or Chapter
903, the Engineer shall issue a permit to the applicant to proceed with such
work.
(Ord. No. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
901.04  PROCEEDING WITH THE WORK.
   Upon issuance of a permit, the applicant shall proceed diligently with the
work until completed. No excavation in a street or alley or other right-of-way
shall remain open longer than is reasonably required for such purpose. Each
applicant shall keep any opening or excavation at all times properly barricaded
and guarded and maintain each traffic control device in place during any time
that the excavation remains open, and shall save and protect the City from any
or all claims, losses, or damages resulting, directly or indirectly, to persons
or property from the opening or excavation in any street or alley or other
right-of-way of the City. Each applicant shall, after the backfilling of any
such opening or excavation in any such unpaved street or alley, cause the same
to be maintained free from hillocks or depressions so that the street or alley
or other right-of-way shall be free from defects as a result of such opening or
excavation and shall be safe for travel and use by the public, until such time
as the backfilling is settled and compacted and all restoration work under the
permit shall have been completed. In the event of an applicant’s failure to
complete the restoration work as set forth in the permit, the City shall cause
the work to be done and all the costs and expenses thereof charged to such
applicants. The costs will be charged against the restoration deposit. If the
deposit is insufficient, the City may pursue collection of the deficiency by
all lawful means. If, after having deducted all restoration costs, a balance
remains on deposit, that balance shall be refunded to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 17-193. Passed 8-15-17.)
 
901.05  FUNDS RECEIVED.
   All money received under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited
with the Director of Finance and shall be placed in the General Fund.
(Ord. No. 17-193. Passed 8-15-17.)
 
901.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever makes any opening, or excavation in any street or alley, or removes
any pavement therefrom, without first having complied with the provisions of
this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 17-193. Passed 8-15-17.)
 
 
 
Chapter 902
Right-of-Way Use Management
 
This chapter was updated by Ordinance No. 19-289 effective December 24, 2019
 
902.01   Purpose and scope of chapter.
902.02   Definitions.
902.03   Types of permits, grant of license and privilege.
902.04   Application procedure, terms and conditions.
902.041   Public utility and telecommunications permit amendment application
procedure.
902.05   Criteria for granting permits.
902.06   Obligations of permittees, conditions of permits.
902.07   Permit fees and auditing.
902.08   Notice of right-of-way work and joint planning.
902.09   Use of permittee facilities by the City.
902.10   Indemnification.
902.11   Removal of facilities.
902.12   Remedies and revocations.
902.13   Reservation of rights.
902.14   Right-of-way vacation.
902.15   Temporary movement of facilities.
902.16   Foreclosure and receivership.
902.17   Repair of sewer laterals in right-of-way.
902.90   Nonenforcement and waivers by the City.
902.91   Controlling law.
902.92   Late response to emergency need for on-site underground facility
location.
902.93   Captions.
902.99   Penalties.
 
902.01  PURPOSE  AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide requirements for the use or
occupation of any and all right of way and public property in the City, the
issuance of permits to persons for such use or occupancy and to set forth the
policies of the City related thereto.
 
   (b)   This Chapter does not take the place of any franchise, license, or
permit which may be additionally required by law.  Each Permittee shall obtain
any and all such additional franchises, licenses or permits necessary to the
operations and conduct of its business.
 
   (c)   No person shall use occupy, own or operate facilities in, under or
over any right-of-way within the City or on property owned by the City, unless
such person first obtains a Permit conforming to the requirements set forth in
this Chapter; provided, however, that permits shall not be required for de
minimis uses.
 
   (d)   The policy of the City with regard to right-of-way is hereby declared
to be:
      (1)   To promote public safety and protect public property;
      (2)   To promote the utilization of right-of-way for the public health,
safety and welfare and to promote economic development in the City;
      (3)   To promote the availability of a wide range of public utility,
telecommunication and other services, including the rapid deployment of new
technologies and innovative services to the City's citizens and taxpayers at
reasonable rates;
      (4)   To promote cooperation among the City, Franchisees, and Permittees
in the occupation of right-of-way and work therein in order to minimize public
inconvenience during work in the right-of-way, to facilitate the delivery of
quality services and products by Franchisees and Permittees to the public, to
avoid uneconomic, unneeded and unsightly duplication of facilities and to
manage the use of space within the right-of-way to provide for the addition of
municipal and public utility infrastructure to meet the future needs of the
public;
      (5)   To ensure adequate public compensation for the private use of the
right-of-way and the regulation thereof; and
      (6)   To promote and require reasonable accommodation of all uses of
right-of-way and to establish the following priority of use of right-of-way,
when all requested usage of right-of-way by Permittees cannot be accommodated:
         A.   Use by the City shall have first priority;
         B.   Use by another governmental entity, with City concurrence, or
other uses required by law shall have second priority;
         C.   Use by public utilities Permittees shall have third priority;
         D.   Use by telecommunications provider Permittees which are not
public utilities, but which provide services to the public shall have fourth
priority; and,
         E.   Special Permittees shall have fifth priority;
provided, however, that the Service Director may reasonably require Permittees
to cooperate to accommodate use by other Permittees and Franchisees and
provided further that the City Manager may alter this priority when the City
Manager determines that such alteration is necessary to protect the public
health, safety and/or welfare.
 
   (e)   It is neither the intent nor the policy of the City to engage in any
discriminatory acts violative of the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
 
   (f)   Nothing in this Chapter should be construed to apply the provisions of
this Chapter to facilities owned or operated by the City or any of its
operations or to sewer laterals and waterlines located in the rights-of-way
which are connected to the City's water or sewer facilities with the City's
permission.
   (g)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in a Permit, all Permits granted
hereunder shall be nonexclusive.
 
902.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.  When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number.  All capitalized terms used in the definition of any
other term shall have their meaning as defined in this Section
902.02. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   (a)   "Applicant" means any Person applying for a Permit hereunder.
   (b)   ''Approved" means approval by the City pursuant to this Chapter or any
Regulations adopted hereunder.
   (c)   "Best Efforts" means the best reasonable efforts under the
circumstances, taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters,
safety, expedition, available technology and human resources and cost.
   (d)   "Chapter" or "this Chapter" means this Chapter
902 of the Codified Ordinances of the City, as amended from time to time and
any Regulations adopted hereunder.
   (e)   "City" means The City of Springfield, Ohio, or, as appropriate in the
case of specific provisions of this Chapter, any board, bureau, authority,
agency, commission, department of, or any other entity of or acting on behalf
of The City of Springfield, Ohio or any officer, official, employee.
representative or agent thereof the designee of any of the foregoing, or any
successor thereto.
   (f)   "Commission" means the City Commission of the City.
   (g)   "De Minimis Uses" shall mean use of right-of-way for mailboxes.
decorative purposes, curb cuts, driveways, irrigation systems and pipes,
laterals or lines connecting a property with the distribution/accumulation
mains, pipes or lines of a Public Utility.
   (h)   "Distribution/accumulation" mains, pipes or lines means Public Utility
mains, pipes or lines used to distribute services or product to or to collect
sewerage or communications from multiple properties served by the Public
Utility.
   (i)   ''Force Majeure'' means strikes, acts of God, acts of public enemies,
riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms,
floods, civil disturbances, explosions, orders of any kind of a government of
the United States of America or of the State of Ohio or any of their
departments, of their agencies or of their political subdivisions, partial or
entire failure of utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within
the control of the disabled party, but only to the extent the disabled party
notifies the other party as soon as practicable regarding such Force Majeure
and then for only so long as and to the extent that the Force Majeure prevents
compliance or causes non-compliance with the provisions hereof.
   (j)   "Franchise" means the nonexclusive right granted by the City
Commission pursuant to the Constitution and laws of Ohio, of the United States
and pursuant to Article XI of the City's Charter to construct and operate a
public utility in the right-of-way and public grounds of the City.
   (k)   "Permit" means the nonexclusive grant of a license and privilege to
use or occupy all or a portion of City's right-of-way granted pursuant to this
Chapter.
   (l)   "Permittee'' means any person issued a Permit pursuant to this Chapter
to use or occupy all or a portion of the right-of-way in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter and said Permit.
   (m)   "Person" means any natural person or any association, firm,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, joint venture, corporation or
other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
   (n)   "Public Property" means any real property owned by the City, other
than a right-of-way as defined in the first sentence of Subsection
902.02(r).
   (o)   "Public Utility" means any entity which provides essential products or
services to the public with the characteristic of service to, or readiness to
serve, an indefinite public which has a legal right to demand and receive the
entity's products or services and which conducts its operations in such a
manner as to be a matter of public concern [See, A & B Refuse Disposers, Inc.
v. Board of Ravenna Township Trustees (1992), 64 Ohio State 3d 385].
   (p)   "Regulation" means any rule adopted by and pursuant to the authority
of this Chapter.
   (q)   "Right-of-way" means the surface of and the space above and below any
public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public
path, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public
boulevard, public parkway, public drive or any public easement or right-of-way
now or hereafter held by the City.  Right-of-way shall also include Public
Property.
   (r)   "Service Director" means the City of Springfield Service Director or
designee.
   (s)   "Telecommunications" means the technology of communication by
electronic transmission of impulses, transmission of impulses by light energy
or transmission by electromagnetic wave.
 
902.03  TYPES OF PERMITS, GRANT OF LICENSE AND PRIVILEGE.
   (a)   The following types of Permits are available:
      (1)   Public Utility Permit.  A Permit granted to public utilities who
desire and are granted authority to utilize right-of-way to provide public
utility products and/or services.
      (2)   Telecommunication Permit.  A Permit granted to persons who are
granted authority to utilize right-of-way to provide telecommunications
services to the public which are not public utility services.
      (3)   Special Permit.  A Permit granted to persons for a specific,
limited use of the right-of-way or a specific portion thereof; other than a
public utility use or other than to provide telecommunications services to the
public.
The applicant for a Permit shall bear the burden of proving its qualification
as a Public Utility, Telecommunications Service Provider or a Special
Permittee.
 
   (b)   All Permits shall specify the use or uses for which such Permits are
granted and contain such other non-discriminatory terms and conditions as the
Service Director determines are necessary to accomplish the City policy
objectives set forth in Subsection
902.01(d), such terms and conditions as are set forth in this Chapter and such
terms and conditions as are negotiated and agreed to by the City and the
Permittee to provide for the public health, safety or welfare.  Permittees are
granted the license and privilege to occupy the right-of-way as specified by
and limited in their Permit granted pursuant to this Chapter.
 
   (c)   Permits and the license and privileges of Permittees granted
thereunder are neither assignable nor otherwise transferable without the
express, written approval of the City.
 
902.04  APPLICATION PROCEDURE, TERMS, AND CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Applicants for Public Utility Permits, or renewals thereof, shall file
an application therefor in such form as the City Manager may require along with
an application fee of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).  The applicant shall
provide along with its application such documentary evidence as is necessary to
show that the applicant meets the definition of a public utility.  The
applicant shall provide such additional information as the City Manager may
require to explain, clarify, supplement or verify information and
representations contained in the application.  The City Manager shall determine
if the application is in order and, if so, shall determine whether or not,  in
accordance with the criteria set forth in Section
902.05, the applicant should be granted a Permit hereunder. The City Manager
shall make a final determination as to whether or not such Permit should be
granted and, if so, upon what terms and conditions are necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this Chapter.
 
   (b)   Applicants for Telecommunications Permits, or renewals thereof, shall
file an application therefor in such form as the City Manager may require along
with an application fee of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).  The applicant
shall provide such additional information as the City Manager may require to
explain, clarify, supplement or verify information and representations
contained in the application. The City Manager shall determine if the
application is in order and, if so, shall determine whether or not, in
accordance with the criteria set forth in Section
902.05, the applicant should be granted a Permit hereunder. The City Manager
shall make a final determination as to whether or not such Permit should be
granted and, if so, upon what terms and conditions are necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter.
 
   (c)   Applicants for Special Permits, or renewals thereof, shall file an
application therefor in such form as the City Manager requires along with an
application fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). The applicant shall provide
such additional information as the Service Director may require to explain,
clarify, supplement or verify information and representations contained in the
application. The Service Director shall determine if the application is in
order and, if so, and if the Service Director also finds in accordance with the
criteria set forth in Section
902.05, that the application should be granted, the Service Director shall
grant or renew such a Permit.  The terms and conditions of such Permit shall be
determined by the Service Director but, in no event, shall the duration of such
Permit exceed 10 years.
 
   (d)   Permits for de minimis uses are not required, with the stipulations
that such uses:
      (1)   exist and continue at the sufferance of the City;
      (2)   may not jeopardize or adversely affect the public health, safety or
welfare;
      (3)   may not interfere with the municipality's own uses of the rights of
way;
      (4)   must be modified, moved or removed, upon notice, when the City
determines in its sole judgment that such action is necessary; provided
further, that in an emergency, or upon failure of the responsible party to
respond in a timely fashion, the City may do or contract to do whatever it
requires and recover the costs of same as such costs are recoverable by law.
 
   (e)   Any Applicant may appeal the failure of the Service Director to grant
a Permit.  In order to perfect such appeal, the Applicant shall file an appeal
to the City Manager within ten (10) days of the Service Director's
determination or after thirty (30) days but within one sixty (60) days of the
filing of the application if the Service Director has taken no action.  The
City Manager shall then review the matter and render a final determination, in
writing and with appropriate findings of fact,  after serving upon the
applicant at least twenty (20) days advance written notice of the Permittee's
opportunity for a hearing before the City Manager and granting the applicant an
opportunity to be heard in person or in writing, as the applicant may chose. 
Except to the extent otherwise appealable by law, the City Manager's decision
shall be final.
 
902.041 PUBLIC UTILITY AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS PERMIT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
PROCEDURE.
   A holder of a Public Utility Permit or a Telecommunications Permit may make
application to amend such permit to add new infrastructure.  Applicants for
amendments of Public Utility or Telecommunications Permits shall file an
application therefor in such form as the City Manager may require along with an
application fee of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00); provided, that if the
applicant is submitting its application for a permit amendment simultaneously
with its annual application to renew its permit, the Three Hundred Dollar fee
is waived.  The applicant shall provide such information as the City Manager
may require to explain, clarify, supplement or verify information and
representations contained in the permit amendment application.  The City
Manager shall determine if the permit amendment application is in order and, if
so, shall determine whether or not,  in accordance with the criteria set forth
in Section
902.05, the applicant should be granted a permit amendment hereunder. The City
Manager shall make a final determination as to whether or not such permit
amendment should be granted and, if so, upon what terms and conditions are
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 05-142.  Passed 05-24-05.)
 
902.05  CRITERIA FOR GRANTING PERMITS.
   Public Utility Permits, Telecommunications Permits and Special Permits shall
be granted to Persons based upon a determination that the following criteria
are met:
   (a)   That the granting of the Permit will contribute to the public health,
safety or welfare in the City;
   (b)   That the granting of the Permit will be consistent with the policy of
the City as set forth in this Chapter;
   (c)   That the applicant has and will continue to have meet the liability
insurance requirements of this Chapter;
   (d)   That the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and with Chapter
195 of the Codified Ordinances; and
   (e)   That the applicant is a proper person to hold the Permit and will
fulfill all its obligations hereunder.
 
902.06  OBLIGATIONS OF PERMITTEES, CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements set forth in this Chapter and
set forth specifically in the Permit granted, each Public Utility Permittee,
each Telecommunications Permittee and each Special Permittee shall:
      (1)   Use its Best Efforts to cooperate with other Franchisees,
Permittees and with the City for the best, most efficient, least offensive
(with respect to aesthetics) and least obtrusive use of right-of-way,
consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic disruptions and hazards, street
cuts and other disruptions to use of the right-of-way;
      (2)   Participate in joint planning and advance notification of right-of-
way work, excepting such work performed in emergencies;
      (3)   Cooperate with other non-Residential Permittees and Franchisees in
utilization of, construction in and occupancy of private rights of way only to
the extent the same is not inconsistent with the grant thereof or with
applicable law;
      (4)   In the event the Service Director determines that a Permittee must
remove or rearrange the Permittee's facilities as necessary so as not to
interfere with higher priority uses, as established in Subsection
902.01(d)(6) [by way of example and not by way of limitation, the operation,
construction, repair or modification of any street, sidewalk, City water or
sewer utility infrastructure or other governmental uses], or if additional or
subsequent City or other public uses of right-of-way are inconsistent or
incompatible with then current uses of Permittees or for any other reasonable
cause, the Service Director shall so advise the Permittee in writing and invite
the Permittee to comment on the Service Director's determination within five
(5) days of such notification.  Upon the written direction of the Service
Director served on the Permittee, and at no cost to the City, the Permittee
shall promptly remove or rearrange the Permittee's facilities as necessary so
as not to interfere with higher priority uses, as established in Subsection
 902.01(d)(6), or if additional or subsequent City or other public uses of
right-of-way are inconsistent or incompatible with then current uses of
Permittees or for any other reasonable cause as determined by the Service
Director.
      (5)   Provide maps and other information in such form and at such times
as the Service Director may require.  It shall not be unreasonable for the
Service Director to require a Permittee to provide maps and other information
which has been previously prepared by or for the Permittee, or the Permittee's
predecessor, and which is in the possession of or subject to the control of the
Permittee.  Said maps and information shall locate, describe and identify all
structures and facilities of such Permittee in, over and/or under the right-of-
way;
      (6)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of
structures and facilities within the right-of-way in accordance with recognized
good engineering and construction practices, with accepted industry standards,
with all applicable laws, regulations and safety codes [including, but not
limited to the National Electrical Safety Code published by the National Bureau
of Standards and the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire
Protection Association] and in accordance with Best Efforts to repair and
replace any street, curb or other portion of the right-of-way, or of facilities
or structures located therein to a condition materially equivalent to its
condition prior to such work, and to do so in a manner which minimizes
inconvenience to the public, the City  and other Permittees; all in accordance
with this Chapter and with all applicable Regulations;
      (7)   Register with all appropriate underground reporting services and,
upon being informed by an authorized representative of the City that there is
an emergency need to have a qualified representative of the Permittee at a site
to locate  underground facilities, have a qualified representative at the
identified emergency need site within two hours after the City's representative
informs the Permittee of the emergency need; and
      (8)   Unless otherwise set forth in its Permit, no Permittee shall enter
into any leases or other arrangements for use of physical space in or on
Permittee's facilities located within the right-of-way without prior
notification to the City, such notice to include an accurate description of the
use(s) to be made of the facilities.  Upon the City's request, the Permittee
shall make the document(s) used to memorialize such leases and other
arrangements available for inspection by the City's personnel at the office of
the Permittee nearest Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (b)   Construction and Technical Standards.
      (1)   Upon grant of the Permit and in order to construct, operate and
maintain a public utility or a telecommunications system to serve the public in
the City, the  Permittee may enter into contracts with any public utility
companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas
located within or without the City; obtain right-of-way permits from
appropriate City, State, County and Federal officials necessary to cross or
otherwise use highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions; obtain
permission from the Federal Aviation Administration to erect and maintain
antennas; and obtain whatever other permits a municipal, County, State or
Federal agency may require.
      (2)   In those areas of the City where telephone and electric services
are provided by underground facilities, all new facilities shall be placed
underground.  In all other areas the Permittee, upon written request of the
City served upon the Permittee, shall use its Best Efforts to place its
facilities underground.  However, the term facilities as used in the preceding
sentence shall not include equipment which is customarily placed on or above
the ground in conjunction with underground transmission facilities (e.g. splice
and terminal pedestals, equipment cabinets and transformers).  Where not
otherwise required to be placed underground by this Chapter, the Permittee's
system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent property
owner; provided, the placement of such system shall be consistent with the
Permittee's construction and operating standards and provided that the excess
cost over the above grade location shall be borne by the property owner making
the request.  All cable to be installed under the roadway shall be installed in
conduit.  In no circumstance shall a new pole or poles be located in any right-
of-way of the City where such pole or poles are not replacing an existing pole
or poles; without first obtaining the written approval of the Service Director.
      (3)   The Permittee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its
system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws as well as with such
published standards as are recommended by the Federal Communications
Commission, whether or not those published standards have the force of law;
unless the Permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Service Director
that such published, recommended standard is impractical and will not
contribute to the public health, safety or welfare.
      (4)   The Permittee shall comply with the City's permitting process prior
to commencing any work in the right-of-way, except for emergencies and
otherwise as provided in this Chapter.  No work in the right-of-way shall be
commenced until such time as any and all required permits have been issued by
the City.
      (5)   Each contractor employed by a Permittee for the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of system equipment shall be
properly licensed.  The Permittee's facilities shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of right-of-way by the traveling
public and shall be so located so as not to cause a public nuisance.
      (6)   The City does not guarantee the accuracy of the City's maps showing
the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures in the right-of-
way.  When a Permittee discovers a substructure not properly located on the
City's map of the relevant area, the Permittee shall immediately notify the
Service Director and cooperate with the Service Director's efforts to correct
and revise the City's map.
      (7)   Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the
Permittee's facilities located in the right-of-way shall be performed in a
safe, orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with recognized good
engineering and construction practices, with accepted industry standards, with
all applicable laws, regulations and safety codes (including, but not limited
to the National Electrical Safety Code published by the National Bureau of
Standards and the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire
Protection Association) and in accordance with the Permittee's then current
maintenance practices.  When consistent with the standards specified in
Subsections
902.06(a)(6) and (b)(3), all new or replacement linear or strand-like
facilities (by way of example and not by way of limitation, cables, optic
fibers and wires) shall be installed, where possible, parallel with existing
electric and telephone lines and new or replacement multiple linear or strand-
like facility configurations shall be arranged parallel and bundled.
      (8)   The Permittee shall at all times operate its facilities located
within the City so as to comply with recognized good engineering practices,
with accepted industry standards and with all applicable laws, regulations and
safety codes (including, but not limited to the National Electrical Safety Code
published by the National Bureau of Standards and the National Electrical Code
published by the National Fire Protection Association).
      (9)   In any event, the Permittee's facilities shall not endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property in the Permit area or other
areas where the Permittee may have facilities located.
 
   (c)   Right-of-Way Work Permit Required.  All Permittees shall obtain a
right-of-way Work Permit from the Service Director prior to the beginning of
any work in the right-of-way; however, prior City approval shall not be
required for emergency repairs or for routine maintenance which does not
require excavation in the public right-of-way or complete blockage of traffic
using the right-of-way or entry on to Public Property other than right-of-way. 
The term "routine maintenance" as used in this subdivision means:
      (1)   inspection of facilities,
      (2)   groundline treatment of poles,
      (3)   switching,
      (4)   repairing damaged or failed equipment,
      (5)   installing new service extensions
      (6)   tree trimming, and
      (7)   relamping of street lights,
      (8)   cathodic protection maintenance,
      (9)   resetting a pole in the general area of its original location.
The Permittee and its contractors shall restore the right-of-way and Public
Property, when disturbed by the Permittee or its contractor,  as required by
the Service Director.  A Permittee shall be liable to the City for any and all
damage done by its contractors to the right-of-way or to Public Property or to
sewer laterals located within the right-of-way.  Such right-of-way Work Permit
shall be issued in writing and shall contain such conditions that may be
required by the Service Director for the protection of the public health,
safety, welfare and preservation of Public Property and right-of-way and to
accomplish the City's policy objectives as set forth in this Chapter.  The
Permittee, and its contractors shall endeavor to complete, in a timely manner,
restoration of the right-of-way and Public Property and all workmanship and
materials used by the Permittee and its contractors for such restoration shall
be subject to the inspection and approval of the Service Director and shall be
warranted for a period of one (1) year from the date of completion for any
failure due to workmanship or quality of materials.
 
902.07  PERMIT FEES AND AUDITING.
   (a)   Public Utility Permittees and Telecommunication Permittees shall pay
an annual fee determined as follows:
      (1)   Permittees utilizing equal to or greater than thirty (30) linear
miles of right-of-way shall pay a fee of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) per
year.
      (2)   Permittees utilizing less than thirty (30) linear miles of right-
of-way shall pay a fee of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per year.
Such fee shall be paid in advance for each year, prior to January 31.  The fee
for partial year permits shall be prorated at one fifty second (1/52) of the
annual fee for each week or portion thereof remaining in the permit year.
 
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this Section
902.07, Special Permittees shall pay an annual fee of Ten Cents ($.10) per
linear foot of right-of-way used or occupied.  Such fee shall be paid in
advance for each year prior to January 31.  The fee for partial year permits
shall be prorated at one fifty second (1/52) of the annual fee for each week or
portion thereof remaining in the permit year.
 
   (c)   In addition to the annual fees set forth in
902.07(a) and (b), Permittees shall pay a right-of-way Work Permit processing
fee in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00); unless the work requires a
permit issued pursuant to Section 901.08 of the Codified Ordinances and the
permittee pays the fee imposed under Subsection 901.08(a), in which case the
fee imposed under this Subsection
902.07(c) is waived. Said fees are payable at the time the notice set forth in
Section 902.08 hereof is filed.  Fees for work done without a Section 902.08
prior notice shall be made within seven (7) business days of the initiation of
such work.
 
   (d)   Special Permittees obtaining permits to install monitoring wells in
right-of-way shall pay a one time fee of Five Hundred Dollars ($500) per well
at the time the Special Permit is issued and, thereafter, an annual fee of
Fifty Dollars ($50) per well included in the Special Permit.  The annual fee
for Special Permits to maintain monitoring wells in the right-of-way shall be
paid in advance for each year prior to January 31.  The said one time fee is in
addition to fees imposed in Section
902.04 of this Chapter
902.
(Ord. 05-142.  Passed 05-24-05.)
 
902.08  NOTICE OF RIGHT OF WAY WORK AND JOINT PLANNING.
   (a)   All applicants for right-of-way Work Permits required under Section
902.06 of this Chapter shall file a written notice with the Service Director at
least seven (7) days before working in or on the right-of-way, except in the
case of emergency.  In addition to such other information as the Service
Director shall require, the notice shall:
      (1)   Identify the right-of-way affected;
      (2)   Contain a description of any facilities to be installed,
constructed or maintained;
      (3)   State whether or not any right-of-way will be excavated;
      (4)   State to what extent any right-of-way will need to be restricted,
blocked or temporarily closed;
      (5)   Provide an estimate of the amount of time needed to complete such
work;
      (6)   Provide a description and timetable of any restorative measures
planned to close any street excavation or to remedy any damage done to the
right-of-way in performing such work;
      (7)   Contain a certification that other affected or potentially affected
Permittees or Franchisees have been notified of the proposed work; and
      (8)   Contain a certification that all Springfield consumers of any
public utility products or services which will be adversely affected by such
work have been or will be notified in advance of any disruption in delivery of
the public utility products and services to such consumers.
   (b)   Permittees may, under emergency or other exigent circumstances, work
in the right-of-way so long as the Permittees notify the Service Director in
advance of the work to be performed, via voice mail delivered to a telephone
number which shall be published by the Service Director, and as long as the
Permittees use Best Efforts to provide the City with the notice required by
Subsection
 902.08(a) at the earliest possible time.
 
902.09  USE OF PERMITTEE FACILITIES BY THE CITY.
   The City shall have the right to install and maintain communications
facilities solely for the City's municipal activities, free of charge, upon any
poles and within any underground pipes and conduits or other facilities of any
Public Utility Permittee, Telecommunication Permittee or Special Permittee,
unless:
   (a)   such installation and maintenance unreasonably and materially
interferes with existing and future operations of the Permittee, or
   (b)   that such installation and maintenance would be unduly burdensome to
such Permittee.
Each Permittee shall cooperate with the City in the planning and design of its
facilities so as to accommodate the City's municipal needs.  The City's right
to use and occupancy of a Permittee's poles or conduit shall be subject to any
and all reasonable terms and conditions the Permittee requires of other third
party users of its poles and conduit necessary to prevent electromagnetic
interference with the Permittee's use of its facilities or necessary to protect
human safety.  The City shall pay the Permittee the reasonable cost to make the
Permittee's poles or conduit ready for the City's use and occupancy.  The said
reasonable cost shall not exceed the cost which the Permittee charges to
similarly situated occupants for similar occupancies.  Nothing herein shall be
construed to require a Permittee to construct poles or conduit where none
exist.
 
902.10  INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, each Permittee shall, at its
sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its
City Commissioners, employees, boards and commissions, agents and contractors
from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including without limitation
worker's compensation claims against the City or others), causes of action,
liability, awards and judgments for injury or damages (including but not
limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and fees of experts retained by
the City in connection therewith):
      (1)   To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of Permittee, its contractors, agents or employees
attributable to the occupation by the Permittee of the right-of-way,
      (2)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person or legal entity or the violation or infringement of
any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other right
of any person or other legal entity by the Permittee,
      (3)   Arising out of the Permittee's failure to comply with the
provisions of any federal, state, or local law or regulation applicable to the
Permittee;
unless, the City's negligence or willful misconduct is the sole and proximate
cause of such injury or damage.
 
   (b)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the City:
      (1)   Giving Permittee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of
any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is sought:
      (2)   Affording the Permittee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement. or other resolution or disposition of any
claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and
      (3)   Fully cooperating in the defense of such claim and making available
to the Permittee all pertinent information under the City's control and the
release of which is not prohibited by law.
 
   (c)   The City shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any such
action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense
thereof and the Permittee shall pay the reasonable fees and expense of such
separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the Permittee or
if representation of both Permittee and the City by the same attorney would be
inconsistent with accepted canons of professional ethics.
 
   (d)   Each Permittee shall maintain insurance coverages (or self-insurance
coverage by Permittees having capitalization in excess of Fifty Million
Dollars, as determined by the City Manager) in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Commercial General Liability Insurance. Each Permittee shall
maintain, and by its acceptance of any Permit granted under this Chapter
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of any such
Permit, commercial general liability insurance insuring the Permittee in the
minimum of:
         A.   $1,000,000 per occurrence;
         B.   $2,000,000 annual aggregate; and
         C.   $1,000,000 excess general liability per occurrence and annual
aggregate.
Such commercial general liability insurance may be written on an occurrence or
claims made bases and must on a  comprehensive coverage form, including the
following: premises operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground
hazard, products liability, completed operations, contractual coverage, and
broad form property damage, bodily injury and personal injury coverage.
      (2)   Automobile Liability Insurance.  Each Permittee shall maintain, and
by its acceptance of any Permit granted under this Chapter specifically agrees
that it will maintain throughout the term of such Permit, automobile liability
insurance for owned, non-owned, or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of:
         A.   $1,000,000 per occurrence; and
         B.   $1,000,000 excess automobile liability per occurrence, for
property damage, bodily injury and personal injury coverage.
      (3)   Worker's s Compensation.  Each Permittee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any Permit granted under this Chapter specifically agrees that it
will maintain throughout the term of any such Permit, Worker's Compensation
coverage as required by the State of Ohio.
 
902.11  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (a)   In the event any Permittee intends to discontinue use of any
facilities within the right-of-way, such Permittee shall submit a notice to the
Service Director describing the portion of the facilities use of which will be
discontinued and the date of discontinuation of use, which date shall not be
less than thirty (30) days from the date such notice is submitted to the
Service Director. The Permittee may not remove, destroy or permanently disable
any such facilities after such notice without the advance, written approval of
the Service Director.  In the event the Permittee abandons such facilities by
failing to remove such facilities within six months after the Permittee has
discontinued use of such facilities, the Permittee shall remove, unless
prohibited by federal or state law, and/or secure such facilities or shall
abandon such facilities in place as directed by the Service Director in written
instructions served on the Permittee.
 
   (b)   Upon such abandonment, the City may elect to accept title to the
abandoned facility.  Such acceptance shall be in writing and upon such
acceptance full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities shall pass to
the City without the need to pay compensation to the Permittee. The Permittee
shall, however, continue to be responsible for all taxes on such facilities or
other liability associated therewith until the date the same was accepted by
the City.  The Permittee shall provide to the City such documents conveying all
of the Permittee's right, title and interest in such abandoned facilities to
the City as the City may require.
 
902.12  REMEDIES AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   In case of any failure of Permittee's physical plant necessary to the
functioning of Permittee's facilities, located in the right-of-way or located
upon Public Property pursuant to the Permittee's Permit, whether due to damage,
age, lack of maintenance or any other cause, the City shall notify Permittee
who shall, within a reasonable time as stipulated by the City, respond and
repair such failed plant.  Should the Permittee fail to act as required, or in
cases where protection of public safety requires an immediate response, the
City may take any required, corrective action and recover the costs of same
from the Permittee.
 
   (b)   The Service Director shall give the Permittee sixty (60) days prior
written notice of City's intent to revoke the Permit under the provisions of
this Chapter stating the reasons for such action.  If the Permittee cures the
stated reason within the sixty (60) day notice period, or if the Permittee
initiates efforts satisfactory to the City to remedy the stated violation, the
City shall not revoke the Permit.  If the Permittee does not cure the stated
violation or undertake efforts satisfactory to the City to remedy the stated
violation; then, after serving upon the Permittee at least twenty (20) days
advance written notice of the Permittee's opportunity for a hearing before the
City Manager and granting the Permittee an opportunity to be heard in person or
in writing as the Permittee may chose, the City Manager may revoke the Permit.
 
   (c)   In the event the Permit is revoked, all facilities located in the
right-of-way or located upon Public Property pursuant to the Permit shall be
removed from the right-of-way and from Public Property at the sole expense of
the Permittee.
 
902.13  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (a)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the City from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating any City utility,
communications or other municipal facilities, from grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating or altering any transportation
infrastructure (by way of example and not by way of limitation streets,
bridges, sidewalks, traffic signals and signs) or constructing, maintaining,
relocating or repairing any public work or improvement or planting and
maintaining any public tree or other plant material.
 
   (b)   Nothing in his Chapter should be construed so as to grant any right or
interest in any right-of-way or Public Property other than that explicitly set
forth herein or in a Permit.
 
   (c)   Nothing in this Chapter should be constructed to limit the ability and
discretion of the City Commission to pass legislation or of the City's
administration to adopt regulations to protect the public peace, health, safety
and welfare.
 
902.14  RIGHT OF WAY VACATION.
   In the event any right-of-way used by a Permittee shall be vacated by the
City during the term of any Permit granted pursuant to this Chapter and if the
Permittee's facilities located in the vacated right-of-way are no longer in
use, the Permittee shall, unless prohibited by federal or state law, at the
Permittee's expense forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless
specifically permitted by the City to allow the Permittee's facilities to
remain in place and upon the removal thereof restore, repair, or reconstruct
the area where such removal has occurred to a condition materially equivalent
to that existing before such removal took place. In the event of failure,
neglect or refusal of the Permittee, after thirty (30) days written notice by
the City to remove the facilities or to repair, restore, reconstruct improve or
maintain such vacated area, the City may, if in accordance with applicable law,
do such work or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared
by the City, shall be paid by the Permittee as directed by the City and
collection may be made by any available remedy.
 
902.15  TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of the
Permittee's facilities placed pursuant to this Chapter in order to lawfully
move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the right-of-way
of the City, upon two (2) weeks written notice by the City to the Permittee,
the Permittee shall, at the expense of the Person requesting the temporary
removal of such facilities, comply with the City's request.
 
902.16  FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP.
   (a)   Foreclosure.  Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
Permittee's facilities located within the right-of-way, the Permittee shall
notify the City of such fact and its Permit shall be deemed void and of no
further force and effect.
 
   (b)   Receivership.  The City shall have the right to cancel any Permit
granted pursuant to this Chapter subject to any applicable provisions of law,
including federal Bankruptcy law, one hundred and twenty (120) days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
the Permittee whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred and twenty (120) days, or
unless:
      (1)   Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after his election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this Chapter and the relevant Permit and remedied all defaults
thereunder; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred and twenty (120)
days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the Court having
jurisdiction in the premises whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and
agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this Chapter and the relevant
Permit.
 
902.17  REPAIR OF SEWER LATERALS IN RIGHT OF WAY.
   (a)   Upon a property owner discovering that a sewer lateral connecting his
property, located within the corporate boundaries of the City, to the City's
sewer line has broken down in that portion of the sewer lateral located within
the City's right-of-way, the owner may request that the City repair that
portion of the sewer lateral located within the City's right-of-way at no
charge to the property owner.  Such request for repair of a broken down sewer
lateral located within the City's right-of-way shall be made by written
application to the City's Service Director  on such application form as may be
required by the City's Service Director and shall be accompanied by a
certification issued by a person registered under to this Section verifying
that the subject lateral is broken down within the City's right-of-way.  Upon
receipt of a proper application for repair of a broken down sewer lateral
located within the City's right-of-way, the City's Service Director shall
commence an investigation to determine whether;
      (1)   the applicant is a proper person to request the sewer lateral
repair described in this Section,
      (2)   the sewer lateral is in fact broken down within the City's right-
of-way, and
      (3)   that the break down in the sewer lateral is not the result of
willful damaging by the property owner or a tenant of the property owner.
If the City's Service Director is able to confirm each of the above factors,
the City's Service Director shall arrange to have the broken down sewer lateral
within the City's right-of-way repaired and shall not charge the property owner
for such repair.  Blockage of a sewer lateral which can be remedied by cleaning
the sewer lateral does not constitute a break down of the sewer lateral.  The
City makes no warranties, either express or implied, regarding the repair of
sewer laterals engaged in by the City pursuant to this section.  The City's
actions in repairing a sewer lateral in no way constitute an acceptance by the
City of a dedication of the subject sewer lateral to the City.
   (b)   Persons requesting that the City repair a sewer lateral pursuant to
this Section shall fully cooperate with the City and allow the City or a
contractor employed by the City to enter onto the property attached to the
subject sewer lateral for purposes of cleaning out the sewer lateral or for the
purposes of making repairs to the subject sewer lateral.  The City shall not be
required to commence or complete any work on a sewer lateral when such full
cooperation is not forthcoming.
   (c)   Persons wishing to be registered to certify to the Service Director
that sewer laterals are  broken down within the City's right-of-way may file an
application [on a form to be provided by the Service Director] along with an
application fee of Fifty Dollars ($50) with the Service Director.  If the
Service Director determines that the applicant has not had a registration
granted pursuant to this Section revoked within the previous three (3) years,
the Director shall register the applicant.  The Service Director may revoke any
registration granted under this Section upon determining that the registrant,
on at least three occasions during the preceding twelve (12) months, has
inaccurately certified that a sewer lateral was  broken down within the City's
right-of-way.
 
902.90  NONENFORCEMENT AND WAIVERS BY THE CITY.
   The Permittee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this Chapter by reason of any failure of the City to enforce
prompt compliance.  However, the City Manager may, upon a request made in
writing establishing hardship and for good cause shown, waive, in writing, any
requirements of this Chapter.
 
902.91  CONTROLLING LAW.
   This Chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio.
 
902.92  LATE RESPONSE TO EMERGENCY NEED FOR ON SITE UNDERGROUND FACILITY
LOCATION.
   Any Permittee which fails to have a qualified representative at the
identified emergency need site within two hours after the City's representative
informs the Permittee of the emergency need, as described in Subsection
902.06(a)(7), shall pay to the City a sum equal to Sixty Five Dollars ($65.00)
for each one half hour, or portion thereof, by which the Permittee's qualified
representative is late in arriving [i.e. arriving after the two-hour period
described in Subsection
902.06(a)(7) has expired] at the identified emergency need site.  A Permittee
shall pay all late arrival charges within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
City's invoice.  A Permittee who fails to have a qualified representative on
site within four hours after the City's representative informs the Permittee of
the emergency need, as described in Subsection
902.06(a)(7), by such inaction authorizes the City to proceed with any
excavation the City's personnel deems necessary, at the risk of the Permittee,
and by such inaction the Permittee waives any and all right the Permittee may
have had to recover from the City any damages which may result from the City's
excavation.
 
902.93  CAPTIONS.
   The captions and headings in this Chapter are for convenience and reference
purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of
this Chapter.
 
902.99  PENALTIES.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this Chapter and all
civil remedies which may be available to the City, including injunction, the
following penalties shall apply:
      (1)   Any person or Permittee violating Sections
902.01(c) or
902.11(a) or both shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Each
day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense; and
      (2)   For failure to comply with any other provision of this Chapter, the
penalty shall be a civil forfeiture payable to the City in the amount of $100
per day for each day of violation.
 
   (b)   Any Permittee may be excused for violations of this Chapter or of its
Permit for reasons of Force Majeure.
CHAPTER 903
Sidewalks, Curbs, and Gutters
 
903.01   Specifications.
903.02   Compliance with State transportation specifications.
903.03   Widths prescribed; multiple entranceways.
903.04   Location of driveways.
903.05   Abandoned driveways.
903.06   Dedicated and accepted streets; rules and regulations.
903.07   Acceptance.
903.08   Application for permit.
903.09   Permit.
903.10   Permit fees.
903.11   Repair of sidewalks required.
903.12   Duty to keep sidewalks clean.
903.13   Coverings for sidewalk openings.
903.14   Support for sidewalk over subspace.
903.15   Interfering encroachments in streets or sidewalks.
903.16   Form of notice.
903.17   Termination of privilege.
903.18   Removal of encroachment.
903.19   Safety barriers.
903.20   Major thoroughfares excepted.
903.21   Protection during construction required; liability.
903.22   Permanent structures prohibited.
903.23   Exceptions.
903.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Improvements, contracts - see CHTR.
Sec. 41 to
46
Construction or repair at owner's expense - see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
Notice to construct or repair sidewalks - see Ohio R.C. 729.03 et seq.
Barricades and warning lights, abandoned excavations - see GEN. OFF.
521.03
Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
521.04
 
903.01  SPECIFICATIONS.
   No curbs or gutters shall be constructed of any material other than plain
Class C Portland cement concrete having a 28-day minimum compressive strength
of 4,000 lbs. per square inch.  Any mixtures introduced into this concrete must
be approved by the City Engineer prior to the batching of the concrete.  All
curb and/or gutter shall received a broom finish.
   Sidewalks and driveways shall be constructed of Class C Portland cement
concrete having a 28-day minimum compressive strength of 4,000 lbs. per square
inch or concrete brick pavers.  Any admixture introduced into or on the surface
of this concrete shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to the use of the
admixture.  Any decorative patterns, symbols, or letters tooled into the
surface of any sidewalk or driveway shall be approved by the City Engineer in
advance of the work.
   All curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways shall be constructed pursuant
to specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.02  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE TRANSPORTATION SPECIFICATIONS.
   The materials, proportions, mixing and consistency of such concrete, not
herein described, shall conform to the specifications pertaining to that item
as set forth in the latest issue of the State Department of Transportation
construction and material specifications.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.03  WIDTHS PRESCRIBED; MULTIPLE ENTRANCEWAYS.
   A single driveway shall have a width of not more than thirty-five feet and
not less than twelve feet, measured at the outside sidewalk line.  Such
driveway shall have not less than a two and one-half foot radius on each side.
   Multiple driveways shall be permitted where necessary, with the approval of
the City Engineer, provided that multiple driveways are subject to the same
width requirements as single driveways, and provided that such driveways are
separated by a safety island not less than ten feet in length measured on the
back of the curb.  Where multiple driveways in excess of two per single
facility per street are desired, the City Engineer shall designate the spacing
of such driveways taking into consideration the location of safety islands and
other safety factors.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.04  LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS.
   No part of any driveway shall be constructed closer than eight feet from the
sidewalk intersection terminus when the inside sidewalk lines meet at a point,
and five feet from the sidewalk intersection terminus when the inside sidewalk
lines do not meet at a point measured at the inside sidewalk line and at right
angles thereto.
   "Sidewalk intersection terminus" means:
   (a)   The intersection of inside sidewalk lines where they meet at a point;
or
   (b)   The points of tangency of the inside sidewalk lines to the curvature
of such sidewalk lines at intersections.
   Driveways serving commercial or industrial properties shall not be
constructed nearer than five feet to side property lines measured at the back
of the curb, except when reconstructing existing common drives.
   When existing driveways are reconstructed or relocated for any reason, and
the application of this section would cause a hardship, the City Engineer may
allow driveways to be constructed in excess of the specified 35-foot width or
closer to the sidewalk intersection terminus, provided the City Engineer
maintains the radius to allow for adequate pedestrian and traffic safety.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
903.05  ABANDONED DRIVEWAYS.
   When and if any driveway is no longer used for driveway purposes, it shall
be considered abandoned and the City reserves and shall have the right to
forthwith take the necessary steps to close such driveway, replace the curb and
restore the pavement to its original condition.  The owner of the property
served by such driveway shall be notified by personal service or registered
mail of the City's intention to close such driveway.  After thirty days from
the date of such notice, if the owner has failed to make such replacement or to
contact the Ciy Engineer, the City Manager may order the City Engineer to close
such driveway, replace such curb and restore such pavement to its original
condition.  Cost of such work shall be charged against the abutting property
and, if not paid, shall be certified to the proper taxing authority for
collection in such manner as provided by law as a special assessment.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.06  DEDICATED AND ACCEPTED STREETS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager shall have the power, in the case of dedicated and accepted
streets, to determine the width of sidewalks and traveled portions of streets,
to determine the location of sidewalks with respect to private property lines
and to determine the type of curb and gutter to be constructed or repaired.
   The City Manager, after giving due consideration to the subdivision
regulations, major thoroughfare plan and other pertinent parts of the general
plan, is authorized and directed to establish such rules and regulations as may
be necessary for the purpose of exercising such power.  Such rules and
regulations and any order of the City Manager in connection herewith shall have
the same force and effect as duly enacted legislation.  Any violation of the
rules and regulations or any order of the City Manager shall be punishable as
provided in Section
903.99.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.07  ACCEPTANCE.
   No concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks or driveways shall be accepted or
approved by the City which have not been constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.08  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Except as provided by this chapter, no person shall construct, reconstruct,
repair, alter, destroy, or grade any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway within
the public right-of-way or construct, reconstruct, repair, or alter any door,
grating, or covering for any manhole, coal hole, vault, cellar, or opening of
any type of any sidewalk unless that person:
   (a)   is either the owner of real estate abutting thereon or is licensed
pursuant to Chapter
1327 of these Codified Ordinances and
   (b)   has applied for and been issued a permit by the City Engineer under
either this Chapter or Chapter
901 of these Codified Ordinances.
The City Engineer may require each person so applying to complete an
application furnished by him for that purpose.  Such application shall be
signed by the person who is to do such work, and shall contain the name and
address of the abutting property owner, a specific designation of the property
abutting the proposed improvement and a statement of the width and length of
the proposed improvement.  The application shall provide that all such work
shall be done in accordance with the specifications for construction and
materials and standard drawings on file in the office of the Director and in a
manner that will safely support and protect the public and that will keep the
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, or street free from nuisances. 
 
   The applicant shall be required to replace any sidewalk to the minimum
standards outlined in Section
903.02.  If the sidewalk or the drive approach at the permit location exceeds
the minimum standards in order to match the existing type, material, or
construction of sidewalk or drive approach.  The plans for any work proposed to
be constructed which vary from the minimum standards shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for approval prior to the start of any work.  It shall further
provide that by so signing, the applicant agrees to indemnify and save the City
harmless from any claim, loss, or damage arising in any way out of such work,
or which may result, directly or indirectly, to persons or property by reason
of any such improvement or by reason of the same not being properly guarded or
protected by lights, barriers or otherwise, so as to prevent injury therefrom.
(Ord. 96-360, passed 10-29-96; Ord. 16-332, passed 12-16-16.)
 
903.09  PERMIT.
   A separate and distinct permit shall be required for each improvement and
shall be either typed or printed.  It shall contain a specific designation of
the property abutting the proposed improvement and a statement of the width and
length of the proposed improvement.  Such permit shall be in possession of the
person actually engaged in doing the work, and shall be exhibited for
inspection at any time upon demand to any member of the City Engineering
Department or member of the Police Division.  All such permits shall have
printed thereon the general rules and regulations under which the work shall be
done, shall be signed by the City Engineer and shall expire thirty days after
the date of issue or sooner if so indicated on the permit by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.10  PERMIT FEES.
   At any time any permit herein required is issued, the applicant therefor
shall pay into the City treasury a fee based upon the following schedule:
   (a)   A fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) or Twenty Five Cents per square foot
of sidewalk and driveway constructed, which ever is the greater. 
      A fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) or Fifty Cents per lineal foot of curb
and gutter constructed, which ever is the greater.
      For Permits pertaining to both sidewalk or driveway and curb and gutter,
a fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) or the sum of Twenty Five Cents per square
foot of sidewalk and driveway constructed or Fifty Cents per lineal foot of
curb and gutter constructed, which ever is the greater.
   (b)   When any person, firm, or corporation has commenced work on a project
involving the construction of sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter without first
procuring the necessary permit therefor, the City Engineer shall make a
thorough investigation to determine whether all work performed prior to the
subsequent issuance date of the specified permit conforms to all pertinent
Ordinances.  The charge for making such investigations prior to the issuance of
the necessary permit shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required
multiplied by two and shall be in addition to the cost of the permit, but in no
event shall the additional charge for investigation exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (c)   Sidewalks, Curbs, and Gutters.  In instances where the applicant
desires to repair or initially construct both a sidewalk and curb and gutter
there shall be only one charge.  This charge shall be made in accordance with
the work item having the highest permit fee as set forth in subsections (a) and
(b) hereof.
   (d)   Sidewalk Vault Covers.
      For the repair of doors, grating, covering of manholes, coal holes,
vaults and cellars:  three dollars ($3.00);
      For the installation or new construction of doors, grating, covering of
manholes, coal holes, vaults and cellars:  six dollars ($6.00).
      (Ord. 05-253.  Passed 10-4-05.)
 
903.11  REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   Every owner of any lot or parcel of land in the City shall keep the
sidewalks, curbing, gutters and driveways in the public right of way in front
of and abutting upon such lot or parcel of land constantly in good repair and
free from nuisances.  Any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway not constructed or
repaired in accordance with the City's specifications for such work shall be
taken up and replaced to conform thereto at the expense of the owner of the
real estate abutting thereon. 
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.12  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN.
   (a)   The occupants of each and every building in this City fronting or
abutting upon any sidewalk shall clear the sidewalk in front of such tenement
or building as the case may be, of snow, ice and filth, by 10:00 a.m. of the
day succeeding any such deposit of snow, ice, dirt or filth.  The owner of any
unimproved or unoccupied lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting upon any
sidewalk in this City, except in such parts of the City as the City Manager may
by resolution exempt from the provisions of this section, shall in like manner
and time, so clear the sidewalks in front of such unimproved or unoccupied lot
or parcel of land.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
   (b)   No owner or occupant of abutting lands shall fail to keep the
sidewalks, curbs or gutters in repair and free from snow, ice or any nuisance.
(ORC 723.11)
 
903.13  COVERINGS FOR SIDEWALK OPENINGS.
   No door, grating or covering for any manhole, coal hole, vault, cellar or
opening of any type shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered on
any sidewalk unless such door, grating or covering is constructed on a level
with such sidewalk, and so that the exposed portion of such covering is not
smooth.
   Any owner of property maintaining any such covering in or on any sidewalk,
which covering is unsafe or dangerous shall, within five days after notice by
the City Engineer, cause such covering to be made safe and secure.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.14  SUPPORT FOR SIDEWALK OVER SUBSPACE.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or alter any vault, cellar,
coal chute or other opening under any sidewalk without a permit from the City
Engineer.  Such work shall be done to the satisfaction of the City Engineer in
a manner that will provide safe support to the sidewalk.  Whenever it becomes
necessary to repair or construct a sidewalk over any such vault, cellar, coal
chute or other opening, the City Engineer may order the owner of such property
to provide adequate safe support for such sidewalk.  Whenever it becomes
necessary to repair or construct a sidewalk over any such vault, cellar, coal
chute or other opening, the City Engineer may order the owner of such property
to provide adequate safe support for such sidewalk.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.15  INTERFERING ENCROACHMENTS IN STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever, in connection with the construction, repair or reconstruction of a
street or sidewalk improvements, or in connection with the laying of sewers,
water pipes or other Municipal utility equipment, it shall become necessary for
a property owner to remove, repair or adjust, in whole or in part, a building
encroachment or other street privilege to conform to such improvement, the City
Manager shall notify the owner of the property to which the encroachment or
street privilege is appurtenant to make such removal or change as shall conform
to the proposed improvement and comply with the laws of the State and the
ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.16  FORM OF NOTICE.
   The notice required in Section
903.15 shall be sufficient if served on the owner or his agent personally or by
letter addressed to the place of business or last known residence of such owner
or agent.  If no owner or agent can be found, it shall be sufficient to post a
notice on the premises.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.17  TERMINATION OF PRIVILEGE.
   If any owner shall, for the period of forty-five days or more after the
issuing of the notice required by Section
903.15, fail to make the removal or readjustment required by such notice, the
City Manager shall be authorized, at any time, to revoke and declare terminated
the encroachment or street privilege, as the case may be.  Notice of such
revocation and termination shall be given in the same manner provided in
Section
903.16.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.18  REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT.
   Whenever the use of an encroachment or street privilege in a public street
or sidewalk is revoked or terminated in accordance with the foregoing
provisions, the City Manager shall be authorized to remove the encroaching
construction, in whole or in part and, where necessary, to fill up, wall up,
seal or cover over any opening or cavity.  The cost of making such removal and
performing such auxiliary work shall be assessed against the property owner. 
Where such removal and auxiliary work are necessary in connection with a
sidewalk construction, such work shall be included as part of the sidewalk
construction and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the abutting
premises.
(Ord. 62-100.  Passed 9-24-62.)
 
903.19  SAFETY BARRIERS.
   The owner of any off-street vehicular parking lot or driving area located
immediately adjacent to any public sidewalk shall construct and install
concrete barriers between the parking lot or driving area and the public
sidewalk in order to prevent cars from backing across or traveling over the
public sidewalk.  The barriers shall be at least six inches above the grade and
at least three inches wide.  Permanent barriers, other than concrete, may be
constructed provided they are approved by the City Engineer.  Barriers shall
not be required wherever driveways are located.  Barriers shall be located so
parked cars do not overhang the sidewalk.
(Ord. 96-360.  Passed 10-29-96.)
 
903.20  MAJOR THOROUGHFARES EXCEPTED.
   Whenever application is made for a business, commercial or industrial curb
cut on a major thoroughfare as designated on the official Major Thoroughfare
Plan of the Clark County-Springfield Regional Planning Commission filed with
the County Recorder, such permit shall be granted only where vehicles leaving
the public street through such curb cut can turn around on the property of the
applicant and re-enter the public street in a forward direction. 
(Ord. 63-26.  Passed 3-11-63.)
 
903.21  PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED; LIABILITY.
   (a)   Where the owner or the lessee of the owner or the agent in charge of
any premises within this City contracts for the improvement in any way of the
same, or of the sidewalk, pavement, curbs, gutters or streets abutting thereon
or adjacent thereto, such owner, lessee or agent shall observe all safety
precautions which were designed to prevent nuisances dangerous to persons or
property from being caused, permitted or continued.  Any owner, lessee or agent
who permits the contractor or any subcontractor for the improvements, or any
agent or employee of such contractor or subcontractor to cause or continue any
such nuisance by noncompliance with safety precautions shall be deemed guilty
of a violation thereof.
 
   (b)   In every case where the subcontractor, his agent or employee causes or
continues any of the nuisances specified herein, the principal contractor shall
be equally liable to punishment for such offense with the subcontractor, agent
or employee directly causing or continuing such nuisance.
(1969 Code Sec. 903.21)
 
903.22  PERMANENT STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect or cause to be erected upon any sidewalk or pavement
of the City any stairway, steps or permanent structure of any nature.
(1969 Code Sec. 903.22)
 
903.23  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person in the employ
of or under contract with the City and doing work authorized by the City; nor
shall they apply to any person to whom a permit has been issued to do work
authorized by Chapter
901.
(Ord. 78-214.  Passed 6-6-78.)
 
903.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, owner or contractor who violates or fails or refuses to comply
with any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  Any
continuance or renewal of any work after being ordered stopped on account of
the failure or refusal to exhibit the permit for inspection, and before such
permit is so produced, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 78-214.  Passed 6-6-78.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 905
Vacation or Narrowing of Streets or Alleys
 
905.01   Vacation or narrowing of streets or alleys upon petition.
905.02   Streets and alleys - name change.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Vacating or narrowing streets - see Ohio R.C. 723.04 et seq.
 
905.01  VACATION OR NARROWING OF STREETS OR ALLEYS UPON PETITION.
   Any person petitioning to have a street, alley, or any portion thereof,
vacated or narrowed as provided by law shall do so on forms available from the
office of the Clerk of the City Commission and shall submit together therewith
the following items:
   (a)   A plot plan which indicates the street, alley, or portion thereof to
be vacated or narrowed and the adjoining properties and their owners;
   (b)   The names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the
street, alley, or portion thereof to be vacated or narrowed;
   (c)   A written statement setting forth the reasons for requesting such a
vacation or narrowing;
   (d)   An application fee of $90.00 if the right-of-way is located in a
district zoned RR-1, RS-5, RS-8, RFBH, RM-12, RM-20, RM-44, or RM-44A or an
application fee of $180.00 if the right-of-way is located in any other zoning
district; however, petitions filed by the Board of County Commissioners of
Clark County, Ohio, shall be exempt from the payment of the application fee.
      (Ord. 15-112, Passed 4-28-15; Ord. 04-248, Passed 8-10-04.)
 
905.02  STREETS AND ALLEYS - NAME CHANGE.
   (a)   The City Commission may, on its own motion or on petition filed with
the City pursuant to Section 723.04 of the Ohio Revised Code, change the name
of an alley or street within the City.
 
   (b)   Petitions may be submitted pursuant to Section 723.04 of the Ohio
Revised Code on forms available from the Clerk of the City Commission and shall
be accompanied by the following items:
      (1)   A plot plan depicting the street to be renamed showing the current
name of the street and the proposed name for the street;
      (2)   Names and addresses of all property owners on the street to be
renamed;
      (3)   A written statement of the reasons for requesting the renaming of
the street; and
      (4)   An application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
         (Ord. 94-236.  Passed 6-28-94.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 907
Trees
 
907.01   Definitions.
907.02   City Forester.
907.03   Duties and authority.
907.04   Shade Tree Commission.
907.05   Registration license.
907.06   Permits required.
907.07   Protection of trees.
907.08   Dangerous trees and obstructions.
907.09   Repealed by Ord. 91-260, Passed 6-18-91.
907.10   Trimming trees near streetlights.
907.11   Failure of owner to act.
907.12   Appeals.
907.13   Interference with City Forester.
907.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery - see Ohio R.C. 715.20
Assessments for tree planting or maintenance - see Ohio R.C. 727.011
Injury or destruction of trees and growing products - see GEN. OFF.
541.04
 
907.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein and when not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural.  "Shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
   (a)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (b)   "Park Board" means the Board of Parks and Recreation.
   (c)   "City Forester" means the qualified designated official of the City
assigned to carry out the execution of the chapter.
   (d)   "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind, public or private.
   (e)   "Street or highway" means the entire width of every public way,
easement, or right of way when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
and includes alleys.
   (f)   "Park" includes all public parks having individual names.
   (g)   "Public places" includes all other grounds owned by or under the
control of the City.
   (h)   "Property line" means the outer edge of a street or highway easement.
   (i)   "Treelawn" means that part of a street or highway, not covered by
sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of
the street or highway used for vehicular traffic, usually the area between
sidewalk and curb.
   (j)   "Public trees" includes all shade and ornamental trees now or
hereafter growing on any street or any public place.
   (k)   "Shade or ornamental tree or shrub" means any and all woody
vegetation.
   (l)   "Principal thoroughfare" means any street upon which trucks are not
prohibited.
   (m)   "Property owner" means the person owning such property as shown by the
County Auditor's plat of Clark County, Ohio.
   (n)   "Tree work" means and includes planting, maintenance, protection and
removal of trees.
   (o)   "Dripline" means the approximately circular vertical extension to the
ground of the outermost branches and leaves of the tree, as an indication of
the spread of the root system.
      (Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.02  CITY FORESTER.
   There shall be a qualified City Forester, who shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Park Board.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.03  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   As an employee of the Park Board, the City Forester shall perform all duties
assigned by the Park Board, which duties include:
   (a)   Enforce or cause to be enforced the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Enforce arboricultural specifications and standards of practice as
adopted by the Shade Tree Commission, which shall govern the selection,
planting, maintenance, protection and removal of public trees and trees in
other public places.
   (c)   Issue a license to any person engaged in tree work within the City who
fulfills the licensing requirements of the chapter.
   (d)   Issue orders and permits for the planting, maintenance, protection and
removal of trees as defined in Sections
907.06 and
907.08.
   (e)   Investigate complaints from any person concerning the planting,
maintenance, protection and removal of any tree.
   (f)   Encourage and foster the planting of trees and other vegetation for
the beautification of the City, and disseminate information to the public
concerning proper selection and care of trees.
      (Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.04  SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
   (a)   There shall be created a commission to be known as the Shade Tree
Commission, comprised of twelve members, who shall serve without pay.  Ten
members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the City, shall be appointed
by the City Commission.  The eleventh member shall be the City Forester, who
shall be an ex-officio member.  The twelfth member shall be an ex-officio
member, either the Service Director, the City Engineer or the City Traffic
Engineer, as appointed by the City Manager.  Only the ten members appointed by
the City Commission to the Commission shall be entitled to vote.  The ten
members appointed by the City Commission shall serve for a three-year term,
except that for the initial term, these members shall be appointed
respectively:  four one-year terms, three two-year terms, and three three-year
terms.  Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as
original appointments.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (b)   The Commission shall elect a chairman who shall serve for a one-year
term and not more than two consecutive terms, shall adopt its own procedures,
and meet at least quarterly.  All official meetings shall be public and all
resolutions adopted shall carry at least six affirmative votes.  The City
Forester shall act as secretary for the Commission.  The duties of the
Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   To receive complaints from any person concerning the acts or
failure to act of any other person within the provisions of the chapter; to
conduct hearings for the purpose of determining the facts; to mediate and to
attempt resolution of these complaints.
      (2)   To deny, suspend or revoke licenses of any person engaged in tree
work, on demonstration of proof satisfactory to the Commission that such action
is warranted because of insufficient competence or failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the City.
      (3)   To give testimony to any court of jurisdiction on request.
      (4)   To establish reasonable criteria with the advice of the City
Forester for the granting of licenses to persons wishing to engage in tree
work.
      (5)   To recommend legislation concerning the selection, planting,
protection and removal of trees, including emergency legislation to require
whatever measures are necessary to control insect and disease infestations that
threaten the continued existence of tree species.
      (6)   To adopt official reasonable arboricultural specifications and
standards of practice, which shall be binding on all persons engaged in tree
work.
      (7)   To adopt a master Shade Tree Plan, with the advice of the City
Forester.  Such Plan shall be limited to public trees and other public places
and shall provide a reasonable selection of trees suitable for each type of
location.  It may provide prohibitions against the planting of undesirable tree
species.
 
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall act to prevent any person from pursuing
his claim in a court of jurisdiction before, during or after an investigation
by the Commission. 
(Ord. 82-571.  Passed 12-14-82.)
 
907.05  REGISTRATION LICENSE.
   (a)   No person shall solicit for or engage in tree work within the limits
of the City without first obtaining from the City Forester a written license. 
Such licenses shall be granted by the City Forester upon the filing of proper
application to be furnished by him, and furnishing satisfactory proof that such
applicant is reasonably qualified by experience, training and reputation to
engage in such tree work.  A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for
the issuance of such license and each such license shall be for a period of two
years.
 
   (b)   Every such person, as defined, shall have at least one individual who
is licensed to perform tree work within the City.  If such licensee ceases to
represent such person, then no person shall engage in tree work until another
individual is licensed as provided herein.  All tree work performed by such
person shall be under the supervision or direction of such licensee.
 
   (c)   No license shall be valid until the applicant has proof of the
following:
      (1)   A bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000) guaranteeing
compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   A liability insurance policy with limits of bodily injury, one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per person and three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000) per accident and property damage of twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000).  Such policy shall contain an endorsement that ten days
notice shall be given the City in the event of cancellation.  The bond and
policy shall remain in effect during the license period.  Noncompliance with
this subsection shall be cause for immediate cancellation of any license.
 
   (d)   All tree work, performed by such persons having at least one
individual who is licensed to perform tree work within the City, or private or
public property, shall be performed according to the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice established by the Shade Tree
Commission.
 
   (e)   Exclusions:  The owner or occupant of any premises desiring to do tree
work on such premises shall be exempted from these licensing provisions. 
However, the owner or occupant of any premises desiring to do tree work on
public trees shall perform such tree work according to the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice established by the Commission. 
Employees of the City, when operating in the scope of their employment, shall
be exempted from these licensing provisions.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.06  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall plant or remove any public tree in the treelawn or
other public place without first procuring a permit from the City Forester. 
The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice adopted by the Shade Tree Commission.
 
   (b)   No person shall excavate any ditches, trenches or do other subsurface
work within the dripline of a public tree without first procuring a permit from
the City Forester.
 
   (c)   No person shall by any type of construction reduce the size of a
treelawn without first procuring a permit from the City Forester.
 
   (d)   Application for permits shall be made at the office of the City
Forester no less than five days in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
In cases of emergency, the City Forester may waive this requirement.  The City
Forester shall issue the permit provided that in his judgment the proposed work
gives reasonable protection to the public trees under the individual
circumstances in the case.
 
   (e)   A person who removes or causes to be removed a public tree from the
treelawn or other public place may be required as a part of the issuance of a
permit to replace such tree at the appropriate planting time next following for
the species selected.
 
   (f)   Exclusion:  The Park Board shall be exempted from these permit
provisions.  All departments of the City shall be exempt from these permit
provisions subject only to the notification procedures of Section
907.07(d).
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.07  PROTECTION OF TREES.
   (a)   In the erection, alteration or repair of any building, structure or
other work, the owner, his agent or individual contractor shall take all
measures necessary to prevent injury to public trees or trees growing in public
places.
 
   (b)   No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any treelawn or
public place any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air or nutrients to the roots of any tree
growing therein except by written permit of the City Forester.
 
   (c)   Unless specifically authorized by the City Forester, no person shall
intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any public tree; attach
a rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivances to any public
tree; allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such
public trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to
burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public
tree.
 
   (d)   All employees or agents of the City who plan, approve or execute any
construction project that will affect any trees in a treelawn or other public
place shall notify the City Forester of such project.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.08  DANGEROUS TREES AND OBSTRUCTIONS.
   The owner, or his agent, of every lot or parcel of land in the City upon
which there exists a dead or dangerous tree shall, within fourteen days of
delivery of a written notice of the City Forester cause such tree to be removed
or pruned.  The notice and written order may be served in person or left at the
owner's usual place of residence.  Service of the written notice and order may
be by the City Forester or his agent.  If the person to whom such notice is
addressed cannot be found within the City, then such notice may be sent by
registered or certified mail to the last known address of such person.  If
there is no last known address of such person or the mail is returned, a notice
and order may be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within
the City.
   A dangerous tree shall be any tree that, in the opinion of the City
Forester, represents a clear and present danger of falling because of its
condition, or any tree that has dead, decayed or broken limbs or branches that
create a danger or hazard to the life, safety or property of the people of this
City.
   A dangerous tree shall also include one that obstructs or shades
streetlights, obstructs the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks or obstructs
the view of any street or alley intersection.  The minimum clearance of any
overhanging tree branch or portion thereof shall be fifteen and one-half feet
above the pavement of any sidewalk, alley, street or principal thoroughfare.
 
907.09  REPEALED BY ORD. 91-260, PASSED 6-18-91.
 
907.10  TRIMMING TREES NEAR STREETLIGHTS.
   Any owner, occupant or agent of any premises shall trim and keep trimmed all
trees growing near any streetlight so that no branches thereof shall be nearer
horizontally than six feet to any such light or the post whereon it is placed.
(Ord. 90-626.  Passed 11-27-90.)
 
907.11  FAILURE OF OWNER TO ACT.
   If the owner or his agent fails to comply with any order of the City
Forester as provided for in this chapter, the City Manager may order the work
to be performed by the City Forester and the cost thereof to be charged against
the land as a Municipal lien or to be recovered in a suit at law against the
owner.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.12  APPEALS.
   Any person affected by any rule or regulation prepared by the City Forester
pursuant to this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing before the
Shade Tree Commission.  Such appeal shall be requested in writing and the
Commission shall have the power to reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
modify such rule or regulation when, upon appeal, it clearly appears:
   (a)   That the rule or regulation is not consistent with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   That by reason of special conditions, undue hardship shall result from
a literal application of such rules and regulations.
      (Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.13  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTER.
   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the City Forester
or any of his designates while engaged in carrying out the execution or
enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or
equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of
property rights by the owner of any property within the City.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
907.14  MEMORIAL TREE FUND
   (a)   There is hereby established an "802 Memorial Tree Fund."  Donations to
the City for the purpose of the planting, replacement, maintenance, and care of
trees within the City shall be deposited in the 802 Memorial Tree Fund.  The
City's Finance Director is hereby authorized to accept cash donations on behalf
of the City for the aforesaid purposes and shall deposit such donations into
the 802 Memorial Tree Fund.  Funds appropriated from the City funds designated
for capital improvements for the purpose of the planting, replacement,
maintenance, and care of trees within the City may be deposited in the 802
Memorial Tree Fund.  Funds deposited in the 802 Memorial Tree Fund shall be
used to purchase memorial trees, provide materials necessary for planting and
on-going maintenance of memorial trees, replacement of memorial trees, and the
removal of memorial trees when they become too large, diseased, or otherwise
dangerous.
 
   (b)   The City Manager shall establish a policy fixing the dollar amount of
donations which the City will require to have each memorial tree planted.  The
donation amount shall be of a sum sufficient to provide for the purchase and
planting of the memorial tree and for normal maintenance of the memorial tree
for the expected useful life of the species of tree selected by the City
Forester.
(Ord. 93-166.  Passed 5-25-93.)
 
907.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) or imprisoned not
exceeding sixty days, or both.
(Ord. 75-272.  Passed 9-23-75.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 909
Weeds
 
909.01   Weeds declared nuisances; prohibition.
909.02   Removal of weeds by owner or occupant.
909.03   Failure to cut; work by City; collection of expenses without lien.
909.04   Notices.
909.05   Violation citation tags.
909.06   Owner to keep trees trimmed; exceptions.
909.07   Civil penalty for failure to pay.
909.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Destruction of weeds—see Ohio R.C. 971.33 et seq.
Injury or destruction of trees and growing products—see GEN. OFF.
541.04
Notice to cut noxious weeds—see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
Noxious weeds—see OAC 901:5-31
 
909.01  WEEDS DECLARED NUISANCES; PROHIBITION.
   (a)   “Weeds” being herein defined as all burrs, vines, Russian, Canadian
and common thistles, briars, dock, burdock, wild mustard, jimson weed, dog
fennel, ragweed, golden rod, sweet clover, wild parsnip, wild carrot or other
noxious weeds, growing wild and uncultivated upon any land within the City,
which may cause noxious exhalations which may prove offensive or injurious to
the health or detrimental to the general welfare of the inhabitants of the
City, are hereby determined and declared to be nuisances and are hereby
prohibited.  "Rank vegetation," defined as all weeds, grasses, annual plants
and vegetation (other than trees or shrubs) which have grown to a length in
excess of ten inches from the ground, is hereby determined and declared to be a
nuisance, and is hereby prohibited.
 
   (b)   No owner, occupant or person having the charge or management of any
lot or parcel of land situated within the City shall allow the existence of the
nuisance described in subsection (a) hereof to continue.
 
   (c)    As used in this Chapter, the term “parcel” shall mean a specified
tract of land with a permanent parcel number.
 
   (d)   Notwithstanding Section
909.01(a) above, plants maintained in compliance with the provisions of an
approved stormwater control plan adopted under the authority of the Codified
Ordinance Chapter
918 and Chapter
961 and on file in the City Engineer’s office are excepted from the definitions
of weeds and rank vegetation.
(Ord. 13-163, passed 6-25-13.)
 
909.02  REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   (a)   The owner, occupant, or person having the charge or management of any
parcel of land less than or equal to four (4) acres in area, situated within
the City, whether the same be improved or unimproved, vacant, or occupied,
shall cut and destroy or remove, or cause to be cut and destroyed or removed,
any weeds and any rank vegetation growing upon any such parcel of land, or
between the property line and the center line of any street upon which such
parcel abuts and prevent the vegetation described in subsection
909.01(a) from blooming or going to seed.  All cutting of such weeds shall be
done in such a manner so that the portion of such weeds remaining after cutting
shall be of a height not greater than four inches above the level of the
ground. 
 
   (b)   The owner, occupant, or person having the charge or management of any
parcel of land greater than four (4) acres in area, situated within the City,
whether the same be improved or unimproved, vacant, or occupied, shall cut and
destroy or remove, or cause to be cut and destroyed or removed, any weeds and
any rank vegetation growing within 100 feet of any public right-of-way, 100
feet of any property line that abuts residential property, or between the
property line and the center line of any street upon which such parcel abuts
and prevent the vegetation described in subsection
909.01(a) from blooming or going to seed.  All cutting of such weeds shall be
done in such a manner so that the portion of such weeds remaining after cutting
shall be of a height not greater than four inches above the level of the
ground. 
 
909.03  FAILURE TO CUT; WORK BY CITY; COLLECTION OF EXPENSES WITHOUT LIEN.
   If the owner, occupant, or agent having the charge or management of any lot
or parcel of land situated within the City fails to comply with the prohibition
stated in Section
909.02, the Code Enforcement Manager shall cause such nuisance conditions, to
be cut or destroyed and prevented from blooming or going to seed. He/she shall,
with the assistance of the Director of Law, cause the cost of such cutting and
destroying to be collected through such legal processes as are available to the
City for the collection of such debts. All expenses so incurred, including
charges for all services and service of notice, the use of machinery, equipment
and labor necessary for cleaning as well as the cutting of such parcel, may be
charged against the owner, occupant, or agent having the charge or management
of the noncompliant parcel of land upon which the City caused such weeds and
rank vegetation to be cut or destroyed.
 
909.04  NOTICES.
   Whenever the Code Enforcement Manager determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he/she shall give written notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefore and notify such person of
their obligation to correct the violation and their continuing obligation to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter. The Code Enforcement Manager need
not give the owner, occupant, or person having charge or management of any
noncompliant parcel of land more than one notice each calendar year. Providing
the notice described in this section is not a precondition for the Code
Enforcement Manager to enforce the provisions of this Chapter or to abate the
nuisance conditions prohibited in Section
909.01(b).
 
909.05  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS.
   The Code Enforcement Manager is authorized and directed to provide
inspectors with citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due
notice and summons to the person responsible for violations of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (a)   Such citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the section of the chapter violated,
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place, and it shall be made
on oath before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
   (b)   The citation tag shall be served on such person in accordance with the
provisions of Section
909.05(d).
   (c)   The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of appearing
at the time and place stated, he may, within that stated time, appear
personally at the office of the Clerk of Municipal Court and on signing a plea
of guilty and a waiver of trial pay a stated fine and stated costs, if any. 
The citation shall inform the defendant that he may be arrested if he fails to
appear either at the Clerk's office or at the time and place stated in the
citation.
   (d)   When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for the arrest of that person.
   (e)   When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed in accordance with Rule 5 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   The citation tag as herein provided shall be sufficient notice,
summons and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
that the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags or a legal notice of violation as provided by Section
909.05, in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
 
909.06  OWNER TO KEEP TREES TRIMMED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)  The owner, occupant, or person having charge or management of any
parcel of land situated within the City and abutting upon any public alley or
street, shall trim and keep trimmed all trees growing on such premises, or
between the property line and the center of such abutting alley or street, the
branches of which trees overhang any part of the pavement or sidewalk of the
public alley or street, such trees to be so trimmed and kept trimmed so that
the lowermost branches thereof shall be a height of fifteen and one-half feet
above the level of that part of the pavement of any sidewalk, alley or street
so overhung by such branches. However, the provisions of this section shall not
apply to trees so small that the branches thereof do not materially obstruct
public travel and which cannot be so trimmed without serious injury thereto.
 
   (b)  The notice provisions of Section
909.04, the enforcement mechanisms in Section
909.03, and the violation citation tag provisions in Section
909.05 are fully applicable to enforcement of this Section.
 
909.07  CIVIL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   In the event any person fails to pay a sum, required to be paid to the City
under this Chapter (hereinafter the “principal sum”), within ninety (90) days
after the sum becomes due and owing to the City, a civil penalty is imposed on
such person equal to thirty-three and thirty-three one-hundredths percent
(33.33 %) of the sum of the following two items:
   (a)   the unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter,
   (b)   court costs incurred in obtaining a judgment against such person for
the unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter.
909.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter where another penalty is not
otherwise provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of any provision of the chapter, a
violation of any such provision is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 910
Building Numbering
 
910.01   Numbering of buildings.
910.02   System of numbering.
910.03   City Manager to assign numbers and notify owners or lessees.
910.04   Authorized exceptions.
910.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to number buildings - see Ohio R.C. 715.26
910.01  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
   Every owner or lessee of a building on any street in the City shall, within
thirty days after receiving from the City Manager notice of the proper number
of such building, place the number in a conspicuous place on the front of such
building.  The figures of such number shall be not less than three inches in
length and shall be painted or shall be made of metal, porcelain or other
durable material.  Such number shall be maintained upon such building at all
times and no number other than the one assigned thereto shall be placed or
permitted to remain upon any such building.  All broken or defaced figures
shall be promptly replaced or restored to their proper condition so that they
may at all times be distinctly read. 
(1969 Code Sec. 103.01)
 
910.02  SYSTEM OF NUMBERING.
   Streets crossing or terminating in Main Street shall be numbered north and
south therefrom and streets crossing or terminating in Fountain Avenue shall be
numbered east and west therefrom, and streets not connecting with Main Street
or Fountain Avenue shall be numbered as though such streets were extended to
Main Street or Fountain Avenue.  Consecutive odd numbers shall be used upon the
south and west sides and consecutive even numbers upon the north and east sides
of all streets. 
(Ord. 86-180.  Passed 3-25-86.)
 
910.03  CITY MANAGER TO ASSIGN NUMBERS AND NOTIFY OWNERS OR LESSEES.
   The City Manager shall assign the proper number to each lot or building
within the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
general plan or map of block numbers now on file in the office of such City
Manager, which map is hereby made a part of this chapter and the City Manager
shall from time to time cause detailed maps or other suitable records of
buildings or lot numbers to be prepared and kept on file in his office.  It
shall be the duty of the City Manager to notify the owners or lessees of all
buildings, upon any of the streets of the City, of the proper numbers of such
buildings and to require such numbers to be affixed thereto.
(1969 Code Sec. 103.13)
 
910.04  AUTHORIZED EXCEPTIONS.
   The City Commission may, by ordinance, authorize specific exceptions to the
street numbering system described in Sections
910.02 and
910.03.
(Ord. 87-468.  Passed 8-11-87.)
 
910.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
 
 
 
TITLE THREE - Municipal Utilities
Chap.
911.   Water Rates and Regulations.
Chap.
913.   Cross Connection Control and Water Quality Protection.
Chap.
915.   Sewer Connections.
Chap.
916.   Use of Public Sewers.
Chap.
917.   Sewerage Charges.
Chap.
918.   Stormwater Utility Charges.
Chap.
919.   Sanitary Services.
Chap.
921.   Private Solid Waste Collectors.
Chap.
922.   Residential Solid Waste Collectors.
Chap.
923.   Demolition Dumps.
Chap.
925.   Collection and Disposal of Storm Waters.
Chap.
927.   Utilities Serving New Condominium Developments.
Chap.
929.   Wellhead and Well Field Protection Regulations.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 911
Water Rates and Regulations
 
(Entire Chapter
911 amended by Ordinance No. 06-242, passed June 27, 2006)
 
911.01   Definitions.
911.02   Service charge rates.
911.03   Unmetered private fire protection.
911.04   Bulk water purchases.
911.05   Rate assessments.
911.06   Special rate arrangements.
911.07   Establishment and use of Water Fund.
911.08   Payment of service charge.
911.09   Failure to pay service charge.
911.10   Fire hydrant use and obstruction.
911.11   Permission required to tap water mains.
911.12   Unlawful to turn on City water when turned off by City.
911.13   Installation of lockable valve box and shutoff valve.
911.14   Water shutoff for non-payment of water; exceptions.
911.15   Late payments.
911.16   Water connection fee on unassessed property.
911.17   Compliance with Chapter
929 requirements.
911.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to provide and regulate water system - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.25
Water works mortgage revenue bonds - see Ohio R.C. 715.09 et seq.
Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
Weekly deposit of water works money collected - see Ohio R.C. 743.06
Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized connections - see
Ohio R.C. 4933.22
Fluoridation - see Ohio R.C. 6109.20
Water pollution control - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 6111
Water supply - see OAC 4101:2-51-37
Backflow - see OAC 4102:2-51-38
 
911.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the term:
   (a)   "Calendar year" means a twelve calendar month period beginning January
1 and ending December 31.
   (b)   "Year" means a period of twelve consecutive calendar months.
   (c)   "Month" or "monthly" means a period of approximately thirty days.
   (d)   "City" means The City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (e)   "Person" means an individual or group or association of individuals; a
firm or any member thereof; a corporation or any executive officer, manager,
person in charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying the
masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
   (f)   "Premises" means, whether private or public, land with the structures
thereon, having any water service connection with the City's water service
system.
   (g)   "Owner" means the legal owner of a freehold estate in real property.
   (h)   "JEDD" means the Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport Joint Economic
Development District.
   (i)   "Outside the corporate limits" means all territory located beyond the
corporate limits of The City of Springfield, Ohio, with the exception of
territory located within the JEDD.
   (j)   “Residential premises” means single- and two-family dwellings.
911.02  SERVICE CHARGE RATES.
   To provide necessary funds for equipment, personnel, and other expenses in
connection with the providing of water services by the City, the City Manager
is hereby directed to charge, assess, and collect a water service charge from
every owner of a premises at the following rates, as applicable, for water
supplied to all premises by the City:
   (a)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly Inside City Rate
Effective January 1, 2019
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $  1.97 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       1.78 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      1.61 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  1.48 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (d) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (b)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly Outside City Rate
Effective January 1, 2019
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $  3.45 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       3.12 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      2.82 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  2.59 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (d) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (c)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within the Springfield Township, and being supplied with water by the City's
water system, the service charge shall be for the quantity of water used
thereon or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in
use.
 
 
Monthly Rates               Monthly Springfield
Effective  January 1, 2019 Township Residential Rate
First 200 cu. ft.           *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.          $  2.96 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.         2.67 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.          2.42 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.      2.22 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (d) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (d)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for water service.  These rates are
effective January 1, 2019.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
              Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Meter Size In Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
Inches                             Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $ 6.56               $ 11.48              $ 9.84
3/4           7.94                 13.90                11.91
1             12.31                21.54                18.47
1-1/2         20.89                36.56                31.34
2             40.51                70.89                60.77
3             76.10                133.18               114.15
4             113.06               197.86               169.59
6             241.90               423.33               362.85
8             630.51               1,103.39             945.77
10            925.32               1,619.31             1,387.98
12            1,367.58             2,393.27             2,051.37
 
   (e)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates            Monthly
Effective July 1, 2019   Inside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.        *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.       $  2.06 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.      1.85 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.     1.67 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft. 1.54 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (h) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (f)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates            Monthly
Effective July 1, 2019   Outside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.        *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.       $  3.61 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.      3.24 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.     2.92 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft. 2.70 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (h) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (g)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within the Springfield Township, and being supplied with water by the City's
water system, the service charge shall be for the quantity of water used
thereon or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in
use.
 
 
Monthly Rates            Monthly Springfield
Effective  July 1, 2019 Township Residential Rate
First 200 cu. ft.        *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.       $  3.09 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.      2.78 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.       2.51 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.   2.31 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (h) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (h)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for water service.  These rates are
effective July 1, 2019.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $ 6.83               $ 11.96              $ 10.25
3/4           8.24                 14.42                12.36
1             12.77                22.35                19.16
1-1/2         21.68                37.94                32.53
2             42.04                73.58                63.06
3             78.97                138.19               118.46
4             117.33               205.33               175.99
6             251.03               439.31               376.55
8             654.30               1,145.03             981.45
10            960.23               1,680.42             1,440.35
12            1,419.19             2,483.58             2,128.79
 
   (i)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly
Effective January 1, 2020 Inside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $  2.27 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       2.04 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      1.84 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  1.69 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (l) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (j)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly
Effective January 1, 2020 Outside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $ 3.97 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       3.57 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      3.22 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  2.96 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (l) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (k)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within the Springfield Township, and being supplied with water by the City's
water system, the service charge shall be for the quantity of water used
thereon or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in
use.
 
 
Monthly Rates               Monthly Springfield
Effective  January 1, 2020 Township Residential Rate
First 200 cu. ft.           *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.          $ 3.41 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.         3.06 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.        2.76 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.    2.54 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (l) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (l)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for water service.  These rates are
effective January 1, 2020.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $ 7.51               $ 13.16              $ 11.28
3/4           9.06                 15.86                13.60
1             14.05                24.59                21.08
1-1/2         23.85                41.73                35.78
2             46.24                80.94                69.37
3             86.87                152.01               130.31
4             129.06               225.86               193.59
6             276.13               483.24               414.21
8             719.73               1,259.53             1,079.60
10            1,056.25             1,848.46             1,584.39
12            1,561.11             2,731.94             2,341.6
 
   (m)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly
Effective January 1, 2021 Inside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $ 2.50 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       2.24 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      2.02 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  1.86 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (p) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (n)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with water by the City's water system, the service
charge shall be for the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same
is measured by the City water meter there in use.
 
 
Monthly Rates             Monthly
Effective January 1, 2021 Outside City Rate
First 200 cu. ft.         *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.        $ 4.38 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.       3.92 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.      3.54 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.  3.26 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (p) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (o)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within the Springfield Township, and being supplied with water by the City's
water system, the service charge shall be for the quantity of water used
thereon or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in
use.
 
 
Monthly Rates               Monthly Springfield
Effective  January 1, 2021 Township Residential Rate
First 200 cu. ft.           *Minimum Charge
Next 3,800 cu. ft.          $ 3.75 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 36,000 cu. ft.         3.36 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 160,000 cu. ft.        3.03 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 200,000 cu. ft.    2.79 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (p) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (p)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for water service.  These rates are
effective January 1, 2021.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $ 8.26               $ 14.48              $ 12.41
3/4           9.97                 17.45                14.96
1             15.46                27.05                23.19
1-1/2         26.24                45.90                39.36
2             50.86                89.03                76.31
3             95.56                167.21               143.34
4             141.97               248.45               212.95
6             303.74               531.56               455.63
8             791.70               1,385.48             1,187.56
10            1,161.88             2,033.31             1,742.83
12            1,717.22             3,005.13             2,575.84
 
   (q)   Voluntarily accepted additional service charges:  The charges
pertaining to a property owner's allocated share of total costs to design,
construct, and collect costs related to City constructed water utility
improvements benefiting the property and which a property owner has voluntarily
accepted, in writing, as additional service charges.  The voluntarily accepted
additional service charges shall be billed to the customer receiving services a
the property to which the voluntarily accepted additional service charges
apply, regardless of changes in ownership, until paid in full.
   (r)   No water service charge shall be imposed upon premises owned or
operated by either the City of Springfield or by National Trail Parks and
Recreation District.
(Ord. 19-150. Passed 6-4-19.)
 
911.03  UNMETERED PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION (REPEALED HEREWITH)
 
911.04  BULK WATER PURCHASES.
   Subject to regulations duly adopted by the City Manager, persons may
purchase water directly from the water treatment plant upon the payment of a
registration fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) per calendar year, or any portion
thereof, plus an additional fee each time water is purchased.  Effective
January 1, 2019, the rate for the additional fee will be sixty cents ($0.60)
for each 100 gallons of water or fraction thereof, each time water is
purchased.  Effective July 1, 2019, the rate for the additional fee will be
sixty-three cents ($0.63) for each 100 gallons of water or fraction thereof,
each time water is purchased.  Effective January 1, 2020, the rate for the
additional fee will be sixty-nine cents ($0.69) for each 100 gallons of water
or fraction thereof, each time water is purchased.  Effective January 1, 2021,
the rate for the additional fee will be seventy-six cents ($ 0.76) for each 100
gallons of water or fraction thereof, each time water is purchased.  Bulk water
purchases shall be in a minimum of 1,000 gallons.
(Ord. 19-150. Passed 6-4-19.)
 
911.05  RATE ASSESSMENTS.
   The City Manager shall apply and assess the rates provided herein as they
are in effect on the date the City's water meter in use on the premises was
read.
 
911.06  SPECIAL RATE ARRANGEMENT.
   The City Manager shall be authorized, but in each case, only after approval
by ordinance of the City Commission, to enter into special agreements for water
supply and charges therefor and for services pertinent thereto with large
consumers outside the corporate limits.
 
911.07  ESTABLISHMENT AND USE OF WATER FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of the service charges authorized by
this chapter shall be deposited daily with the Director of Finance and shall be
accounted for and be known as the Water Fund and when appropriated by the City
Commission, subject to the provisions of any ordinance or indenture of mortgage
authorizing issuance of any securing mortgage revenue bonds for the water works
system, shall be available for the payment of the costs and expenses of the
management, maintenance and repair of the City water system and the water
treatment plant, and any surplus in the Fund following such payment shall be
used for the payment of the interest on bonds issued and outstanding or which
may be issued to provide funds with which to pay the City's portion of the cost
of constructing such water system or part thereof and the water treatment
works, and to retire such bonds when they mature, and for costs incurred in the
enlargement or replacement of the water system and treatment works.
 
911.08  PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge levied and assessed by this chapter shall be payable to
the City in monthly payments in each year, provided, however, that the service
charge payable for any premises for water service during the first monthly
billing period after such service begins where the amount of water supplied
during such period is less than the maximum amount for which the minimum charge
is assessed and collected pursuant to such section shall be prorated on a per
diem basis according to the following formula:
 
 
Amount of water supplied                                Minimum
Maximum amount of water supplied under minimum charge X Charge  = Charge
 
911.09  FAILURE TO PAY SERVICE CHARGE.
   Each service charge levied pursuant to this chapter shall be collected by
the Finance Director.  For any refusal, failure or neglect in paying these
service charges when due, the services shall be terminated without further
notice and restored only upon payment of all charges and fees due.  The City
Manager shall make and enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be deemed
necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of
the City water system and the water treatment plant, for the construction and
use of house services and connections to the water system and for the
regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such charges.
 
911.10  FIRE HYDRANT USE AND OBSTRUCTION.
   No person, unless duly authorized by the proper authorities, shall make use
of the water from any fire hydrant of the City, or open any such hydrants for
any purpose whatever, or place any building material or other obstruction so as
to interfere with the use of or free access to such hydrant; or willfully
injure any cistern or hydrant.
 
911.11  PERMISSION REQUIRED TO TAP WATER MAINS.
   No person shall tap any of the pipes of the City water works until he has
first filed his written request therefor with the City Manager and has obtained
permission to do so.
 
911.12  UNLAWFUL TO TURN ON CITY WATER WHEN TURNED OFF BY CITY.
   No person, after the City water has been turned off from his premises by
order of the City Manager, shall turn such City water on again until the
permission of the City Manager has been obtained therefor.
 
911.13  INSTALLATION OF LOCKABLE VALVE BOX AND SHUTOFF VALVE.
   In the event water service has been terminated to a property due to non-
payment for water or sewer services provided to the property or due to
violation at the property of any other rules and regulations pertaining to
receiving the City’s water or sewer municipal utility services, and it is
subsequently discovered that water or sewer service has been turned back on
without the City’s authorization on, or the property has been reconnected to
the City’s water or sewer system without the City’s authorization, then the
Service Director or Finance Director, at their discretion, may install a valve
box with a lockable shutoff valve for the property and the cost to the City of
procuring and installing the valve box with a lockable shutoff valve and their
appurtenances shall be added to the utility bill for the property and collected
in equal installments during a period of up to twelve months in the manner of
other water charges.
(Ord. No. 08-289. Passed 9-23-08.)
 
911.14  WATER SHUTOFF FOR NONPAYMENT OF WATER BILL; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Payment Required Prior to Water Service Resumption.  Where a water
bill has not been paid as provided by the rules and regulations of the City
Manager and the proper shutoff notice has been delivered, the water shall
thereafter be shut off in accordance with these rules and regulations, and it
shall not thereafter be turned on again until all charges due and payable,
including advance charges, if any, are fully paid.
 
   (b)   Application.  This section shall apply whether or not there has been,
in the meantime, a change of ownership or possession of the premises supplied,
except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) hereof.
 
   (c)   Insolvent or Bankrupt Water User.  Where premises in arrears for
payment of water bills becomes subject to a bankruptcy or insolvency court, the
Service Department may permit the supply of water to such premises to be
continued or restored without previous payment of the water bill accrued under
the bankrupt or insolvent owner.
 
   (d)   Foreclosure Proceedings Against Premises Supplied With City Water. 
Whenever the Department of Finance, Utilities Billing Division, has been given
written notice that foreclosure proceedings have been instituted against
premises supplied with City water, the Department shall arrange to require
deposit payments or other suitable guaranties in advance for the water
furnished to such premises until the premises have been sold or the proceedings
otherwise terminated.  If the Department receives notification in writing of
the pendency of the foreclosure proceedings and the location of the premises
affected thereby prior to such sale, the purchaser at the foreclosure sale
shall be entitled to have water furnished the premises without payment of water
charges accrued under the previous owner, for any period subsequent to the date
of the receipt of notice of the pendency of foreclosure proceedings by the
Department.
 
   (e)    Where payments required to be made to the City under a Development
Incentive Agreement or a pre-annexation agreement (i.e. a contract by which a
customer outside of the City’s corporate boundary is provided with municipal
water and/or sewer services) have not been paid as provided under the
Development Incentive Agreement or pre-annexation agreement and the proper
shutoff notice has been delivered, the water shall thereafter be shut off in
accordance with these rules and regulations, and it shall not thereafter be
turned on again until all charges due and payable, including advance charges
and payments required to be made under the Development Incentive Agreement or
pre-annexation agreement, if any, are fully paid.
(Ord. 11-321. Passed 12-6-11.)
 
911.15  LATE PAYMENTS.
   All water charges due from customers under the provisions of the chapter and
remaining unpaid after they have become due shall bear interest at the rate of
one percent (1%) per month or part thereof.
 
911.16  WATER CONNECTION FEE ON UNASSESSED PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to make a tap to or
connection with a water main for the purpose of affording water service to
abutting property that has not previously had water service where such property
has not been assessed the cost and expense of the construction of such water
main until the applicant shall have paid a water main connection fee to the
City.
 
   (b)   The Finance Director shall set such fee as follows:
      (1)   The estimated replacement cost of the assets of the City’s water
utility system less depreciation and less the amount of debt outstanding shall
be divided by the total number of 5/8-inch water meters or meter equivalents in
place system-wide.
      (2)   The applicable meter equivalent ratio from the chart below shall be
selected based on the size of the meter being installed at the property.
      (3)   The result of the calculation in subparagraph (1) above shall be
multiplied by the meter equivalent ratio.
 
 
Meter Size in Inches Meter Equivalent Ratio
5/8                  1.0
3/4                  1.5
1                    2.2
1-1/2                4.2
2                    6.2
3                    15.0
4                    25.0
6                    50.0
8                    80.0
10                   115.0
12                   155.0
 
   (c)   A tap or connection to the water system that increases the size of the
meter serving the property shall only be made after the payment of both a water
upgrade fee based on the difference between the size of the previous meter and
the size of the new meter, and the sewer upgrade fee described in Section
915.02(d) of these Codified Ordinances.
 
   (d)   The water upgrade fee and the sewer upgrade fee shall be paid either
in cash or by execution of a note therefor payable to the City over a period
not to exceed five (5) years and billed to the owner by the City with each
water and sewer bill during such period.
 
   (e)   The Finance Director shall recalculate the connection fee every two
years. Any change in the fee as a result of such recalculation shall apply only
to new connections applied for after the recalculation has been made.
 
   (f)   The water connection fee calculated as set out above shall be
effective for any connections made on or after January 1, 2017, except that a
property owner may connect if that owner pays the fee as calculated under the
terms defined in Ordinance No. 13-311, passed December 23, 2013, before
December 15, 2016.
(Ord. 13-311, passed 12-23-13; Ord. 16-102, passed 4-12-16.)
 
911.17  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER
929 REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person subject to and required to comply with the requirements of
Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances and who also receives water service from the
City at the property subject to regulation under Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances is required to comply with the requirements of
Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinance as a condition to receiving continuing water
service from the City at the property subject to regulation under Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances. In the event a person receiving water service
from the City at a property subject to regulation under Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances fails to come into compliance with the
requirements of Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances within ten days after receiving notice of such
non-compliance, the City may shut off the non-complying person's water service
at the property subject to regulation under Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances, until such person's compliance with Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances has been achieved.
(Ord. 16-258. Passed 9-13-16.)
 
911.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 913
Cross Connection Control and Water Quality Protection
 
913.01   Backflow protection.
913.02   Definitions.
913.03   Cross connections prohibited.
913.04   Surveys and investigations.
913.05   Where protection is required.
913.06   Type of protection required.
913.07   Backflow prevention devices.
913.08   Booster pumps.
913.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Cross connections - see OAC 3745-95-01 – 3745-95-02
Backflow prevention devices - see OAC 3745-95-06
Violations - see OAC 3745-95-08
 
913.01  BACKFLOW PROTECTION.
   If, in the judgment of the Service Director, the integrity of the public
water system is, or can be, endangered by backflow from an actual or a
potential cross connection within the plumbing system of a water consumer, the
Service Director may order the installation of an approved backflow prevention
method or device consisting of either an air-gap, vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer or any combination thereof at the water
service connection to the premise.  The water consumer shall install the
designated device or method at his own expense, and failure, refusal or
inability to install such device or method immediately shall constitute a
ground for discontinuing water service to the premise until such device or
method has been installed and approved by the Service Director.  The use of the
approved backflow preventer at the water service connection does not in any way
affect or eliminate the need for individual fixture devices or air-gaps as
required by the laws of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
913.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Air gap separation” means the unobstructed vertical distance through
the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet water
supply to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.
   (b)   “Approved” means that a backflow prevention device or method has been
accepted by the Service Department and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
as suitable for the proposed use.
   (c)   “Auxiliary water system” means any water system on or available to the
premises other than the City’s public water system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary water systems may include, but are not
limited to, water from another purveyor’s public water system; or water from a
source such as wells, cisterns, tanks, lakes or streams; or process fluids; or
used water.
   (d)   “Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply from any
source other than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   (e)   “Backflow prevention device” means any device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
   (f)   “City” means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (g)   “Consumer” means the owner or person in control of any premises
supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   (h)   “Consumer’s water system” means any water system, located on the
premises occupied by the consumer, supplied by, or in any manner connected to a
public water system.
   (i)   “Containment” means an impairment of the quality of the water by
sewage or process fluids or waste to a degree which could create an actual
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by
exposure.
   (j)   “Cross connection” means any arrangement whereby backflow can occur.
   (k)   “Double check valve assembly” means an assembly composed of two
single, independently acting, check valves including tightly closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing
the watertightness of each check valve.
   (l)   “Health hazard” means any condition, device, or practice in a water
system or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and
well-being of users. The word “severe” as used to quality “health hazard” means
a hazard to the health of the water system user or the public that could
reasonably be expected to result in potentially lethal or permanently
debilitating morbidity or in death.
   (m)   “Interchangeable connection” means an arrangement or device that will
allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water.
   (n)   “Nonpotable water” means water not safe for drinking, personal
hygienic or culinary use.
   (o)   “Person” means the state, any political subdivision, public or private
corporation, individual, partnership, association, trust, or other legal
entity.
   (p)   “Pollution” means the presence in water of any foreign substance that
tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a health hazard or impair the
usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual
hazard to the public health but which does adversely affect such waters for
domestic use.
   (q)   “Potable water” means water which is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary, and personal hygienic purposes and meets the requirements of the
Clark County Combined Health District.
   (r)   “Process fluids” means any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a potable consumer’s water system. This includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, tanks,
cisterns, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   (s)   “Public water system” means any publicly or privately owned potable
water system defined in to Ohio R.C. 6109.01(A).
   (t)   “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure.  In
case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure.  The unit must include
tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   (u)   “Service connection” means the terminal end of a service line from the
public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then
the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
   (v)   “System hazard” means a condition through which posing an actual or
potential threat of damage to the physical properties of the public eater
system or a potable consumer’s water system.
   (w)   “Pollutional hazard” means a condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water system or a potable consumer’s water system.
   (x)   “Used water” means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a
public water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through
the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water
purveyor.
   (y)   “Water purveyor” means the owner or operator of a public water system.
   (z)   “Water system” means the pumps, plumbing, and connected appurtenances
and connected water storage devices used to transport and store water.
   (aa)   “Ohio E.P.A.” means the Ohio State Environmental Protection Agency.
      (Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89; Ord. 12-293. Passed 9-25-12.)
 
913.03  CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any
premises where actual or potential cross connections to a public water system
or a potable consumer’s water system may exist unless such actual or potential
cross connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Service
Director.
 
   (b)   No person shall install or maintain any connection whereby water from
an auxiliary water system may enter a public water system or potable consumer’s
water system unless the auxiliary water system and the method of connection and
use of such system shall have been approved by the Service Director and by the
Ohio E.P.A. as required by Ohio R.C. 6109.13-15.
 
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall install
or maintain a water system wherein any air gap separation distance is less than
twice the diameter of the water supply pipe or faucet or is less than one inch,
whichever is the greater distance.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89; Ord. 12-293. Passed 9-25-12.)
 
913.04  SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   The Service Director, or his authorized representative, shall have the
right to enter premises served by the public water system at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making surveys and investigations of water use
practices within the premises.
(Ord. 00-456. Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (b)   On request by the Service Director, or his authorized representative,
the consumer shall furnish the water purveyor, or its authorized
representative, information on water use practices within the consumer’s
premises.
(Ord. 00-456. Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (c)   Subsection (a) hereof does not relieve the consumer of the
responsibility for conducting, or causing to be conducted, periodic surveys of
water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or
potential cross connections in the consumer’s water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could backflow into a public water system or a
potable consumer’s water system.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
913.05  WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (a)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving the consumer’s premises,
where in the judgment of the Service Director or the Ohio E.P.A., a real or
potential health, pollutional, or system hazard to the public water system
exists.
 
   (b)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving the consumer’s premises where
the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The premises has an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary
system is accepted as an additional source by the Service Director and the
additional source is approved by the Ohio E.P.A.
      (2)   Any substance is handled on the premises in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to a public water system.
      (3)   The premises has internal cross connections that, in the judgment
of the Service Director, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross connections
exist.
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      (5)   The premises has a repeated history of cross connections being
established or re-established.
      (6)   Other conditions in which an approved backflow prevention device is
required by Federal or Ohio law.
 
   (c)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at each
point of connection between a public water system and an auxiliary water system
and at each point of connection between a potable consumer’s water system and
an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary system is accepted as an
additional source by the Service Director and the additional source is approved
by the Ohio E.P.A.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
913.06  TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   The type of protection required under Section
913.05(b), shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      (1)   A required air gap separation and an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be maintained where a public water
system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health
hazard;
      (2)   A required air gap separation shall be maintained or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
a public water system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a
system or health hazard or a pollutional hazard.
 
   (b)   The type of protection required under Section
913.05(c) shall be a required air gap separation or an approved interchangeable
connection.
 
   (c)   Where an auxiliary water system is used as a secondary source of water
for a fire protection system, the provisions of subsection (b) here of for a
required air gap separation or an approved interchangeable connection may be
waived by the Service Director and the Ohio E.P.A. provided:
      (1)   At premises where the auxiliary water system may be contaminated
with substances that could cause a system or health hazard, a public water
system or a potable consumer’s water system shall be protected against backflow
by installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device;
      (2)   At all other premises, a public water system or a potable
consumer’s water system shall be protected against backflow by installation of
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device;
      (3)   A public water system or a potable consumer’s water system shall be
the primary source of water for the fire protection system;
      (4)   The fire protection system shall be normally filled with water from
a public water system or a potable consumer’s water system;
      (5)   The water in the fire protection system shall be used for fire
protection only, with no other use of water from the fire protection system,
downstream from the approved backflow prevention device.
 
   (d)   Type of Backflow Protection Required; Domestic and Commercial Water
Services. An approved backflow prevention device of the type designated shall
be installed on each domestic water service connection to the following types
of facilities unless the Service Director determines that no real or potential
health, pollutional, or system hazard to the public water system exists.
 
   Abbreviations used in this chapter are as follows:
      A.G.—Air Gap Separation per Section
913.03(c)
      R.P.—Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer.
 
 
                                                                         Minimum
                                                                         Type
Type of Facility                                                         of
                                                                         Protection
Breweries, distilleries, bottling plants                                 R.P.
Car wash with recycling system and/or wax eductor                        R.P.
Chemical plants                                                          R.P.
Dairies                                                                  R.P.
Health care facilities                                                   R.P.
Fertilizer plants                                                        R.P.
Film laboratory or processing plant                                      R.P.
Food or beverage plant                                                   R.P.
Laboratories                                                             R.P.
Laundries and dry cleaning plants                                        R.P.
Machine tool plants (health or system hazard)                            R.P.
Machine tool plants (pollutional hazard)                                 R.P.
Metal processing plant (health or system hazard)                         R.P.
Metal processing plant (pollutional hazard)                              R.P.
Metal plating plant                                                      R.P.
Morgues and mortuaries                                                   R.P.
Packing houses or rendering plants                                       R.P.
Paper products plant                                                     R.P.
Petroleum processing plant                                               R.P.
Petroleum storage yard (health or system hazard)                         R.P.
Pharmaceutical or cosmetic plant                                         R.P.
Power plants                                                             R.P.
Radioactive material plants                                              R.P.
Restaurants with soap eductors and/or industrial type disposal           R.P.
Sand and gravel pits                                                     R.P.
Schools with laboratories having acid wastes                             R.P.
Sprinkling or irrigation systems                                         R.P.
Swimming pools with piped fill line                                      R.P.
Sewage treatment plants                                                  R.P.
Sewage pumping stations                                                  R.P.
Veterinary establishments                                                R.P.
Premises having submerged inlets to equipment                            R.P.
Premises having self-draining yard hydrants, fountains, hose boxes or
similar devices presenting a health or system hazard (i.e., chemical     R.P.
storage plants, tank farms, bulk storage yards)
Premises having self-draining yard hydrants, fountains, hose boxes or
similar devices presenting a pollutional hazard (i.e., parks,    play R.P.
fields, cemeteries)
   (e)   Type of Backflow Protection Required; Fire Protection Service. An
approved double check valve assembly device or the use of a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on each fire protection
service to any premises unless the Service Director determines that no real or
potential health, pollutional, or system hazard to the public water system
exists. The double check assembly device must meet all of the following
requirements before it can be approved by the City Water and Fire Divisions.
      (1)   Water from the downstream side of the double check valve assembly
device shall be used for fire protection only.
      (2)   There shall be no regular use of water downstream from the double
check valve assembly device other than for fire system make-up water.
      (3)   The fire system shall be filled with water from the public water
supply only.
      (4)   The public water supply must be the primary source of water for
fighting fires.
      (5)   The water system must contain no additives. Provided, however,
where the fire protection system contains any of the following components, a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed
between such component and the rest of the water system so as to isolate such
component from the rest of the water system:
            Auxiliary Water System
            Anti-Freeze Legs
            Covered Gravity or Pressure Storage Tanks
            Uncovered Storage Tanks or Reservoirs
 
   (f)   The City Fire Division shall maintain a current record of all double
check valve assembly devices which are a part of the fire sprinkler system
connected to the City public water system.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
913.07  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   Any backflow prevention device installed in the City shall be of a
model or construction approved by the Service Director and the Ohio E.P.A. and
shall be tested and be found to function properly and shall be certified by an
inspector certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3703.01(D), 3703.04, and 3703.05
before the device is put in use.
 
   (b)   Any backflow prevention device required shall be installed at a
location and in a manner approved by the Service Director and shall be
installed by and at the expense of the water consumer.
 
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the consumer, on any premises on which
backflow prevention devices have been installed to have thorough inspections
and operational tests made of the devices at such intervals and in such manner
as may be required by the Service Director or the Ohio E.P.A., but in no event
shall such tests be made at greater than twelve-month intervals.  These
inspections and test shall be at the expense of the water consumer and shall be
performed by an inspector certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3703.01(D), 3703.04
and 3703.05.
 
   (d)   Backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced
at the expense of the consumer within fourteen days after they are found to be
defective. Records of such inspections, tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be
kept by the consumer and made available to the Service Director and the City’s
Health Commissioner.
 
   (e)   Backflow prevention devices shall be tested during normal business
hours. Manifold or dual settings of the devices should be considered for
premises requiring uninterrupted water service.  Backflow prevention devices
set in manifold shall meet the minimum flow requirements of a single device of
the proper size.
 
   (f)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Service Director
or the Ohio E.P.A. prior to the effective date of this regulation and which are
properly maintained shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance
requirements, be excluded from the requirements of subsections (a) and (b)
hereof, if the Service Director and the Ohio E.P.A. are assured that the
devices will satisfactorily protect the public water system.
 
   (g)   The Clark County Combined Health District shall maintain a current
record of all backflow prevention devices which are a part of any water system
connected to a public water system.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
   (h)   Persons performing inspections as required in this section shall,
within fifteen days of performing such inspection, file with the Clark County
Combined Health District a test report. The test report shall include the
following data:
      (1)   Type of backflow prevention device.
      (2)   Size of backflow prevention device.
      (3)   Location of backflow prevention device.
      (4)   Model designation of backflow prevention device.
      (5)   Date backflow prevention device was installed.
      (6)   Test results before backflow prevention device was repaired.
      (7)   Description of repairs made.
      (8)   Description of materials used in making repairs.
      (9)   Results of a final test of the backflow prevention device after the
repair or installation.
      (10)   Inspector’s signature.
      (11)   Date of inspection.
      (12)   Certification by the owner of the premises on which the backflow
prevention device is located certifying that the backflow prevention device has
been in constant use at the location of the backflow prevention device during
the entire proscribed interval bet   ween test periods and that during that
period the backflow prevention device was not by-passed, made inoperative, or
removed without proper authorization.
      (13)   Such other information as the Health Commissioner deems necessary.
 
The person filing such report with the Clark County Combined Health District
shall pay a filing fee in the amount of Ten Dollars ($10.00) to the Clark
County Combined Health District for each report filed.
(Ord. 89-427. Passed 8-1-89; Ord. 12-293. Passed 9-25-12)
 
913.08  BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any
premises where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within such premises, unless such booster pump is equipped with a low-pressure
cutoff designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to ten pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
 
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-
pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the Service
Director, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
 
   (c)   The low-pressure cutoff control for booster pumps shall conform to the
Ohio E.P.A. Specifications as described in the Ohio E.P.A. publication,
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control, third edition 1987.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
913.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree,
punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months or both.
(Ord. 89-21. Passed 1-10-89.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 915
Sewer Connections
 
915.01   Definitions.
915.02   Sewer connection fee on unassessed property.
915.03   Issuance of license.
915.04   Fees; Sewer Fund.
915.05   Licensing sewer tappers.
915.06   Examination for license.
915.07   Bond required; revocation.
915.08   Unlicensed sewer tapping.
915.09   Sewer connections.
915.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license sewer tappers—see Ohio R.C. 715.27
Compulsory sewer connections—see Ohio R.C. 729.06
Regulations to control house sewers and connections— see Ohio R.C. 729.51
915.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of Chapters
915 and
917 of this Code, the definitions set forth in Chapter
916 shall apply.
(Ord. 67-199.  Passed 9-25-67.)
 
915.02  SEWER CONNECTION FEE ON UNASSESSED PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to make a tap to or
connection with a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer for the purpose of
affording sanitary sewer service to abutting property that has not previously
had sanitary sewer service where such property has not been assessed the cost
and expense of the construction of such sewer until the applicant shall have
paid a sewer connection fee to the City.
 
   (b)   The Finance Director shall set such fee as follows:
      (1)   The estimated replacement cost of the assets of the City’s sanitary
sewer utility system less depreciation and less the amount of debt outstanding
shall be divided by the total number of 5/8-inch water meters or meter
equivalents in place system-wide.
      (2)   The applicable meter equivalent ratio from the chart below shall be
selected based on the size of the meter being installed at the property.
      (3)   The result of the calculation in subparagraph (1) above shall be
multiplied by the meter equivalent ratio.
 
 
Meter Size in Inches Meter Equivalent Ratio
5/8                  1.0
3/4                  1.5
1                    2.2
1-1/2                4.2
2                    6.2
3                    15.0
4                    25.0
6                    50.0
8                    80.0
10                   115.0
12                   155.0
   (c)   A sewer connection for a property to be served by the sanitary sewer
system, but not by the water system, shall be calculated by the Finance
Director based on the size of the well meter, or some other measure that
estimates the sewer capacity being made available to the property.
 
   (d)   A tap or connection to the sanitary sewer system that increases the
size of the meter serving the property shall only be made after the payment of
a sewer upgrade fee based on the difference between the size of the previous
meter and the size of the new meter.
 
   (e)   The sewer upgrade fee shall be paid either in cash or by execution of
a note therefor payable to the City over a period not to exceed five (5) years
and billed to the owner by the City with each sewer bill during such period.
 
   (f)   The Finance Director shall recalculate the connection fee every two
years. Any change in the fee as a result of such recalculation shall apply only
to new connections applied for after the recalculation has been made.
 
   (g)   The sewer connection fee calculated as set out above shall be
effective for any connections made on or after January 1, 2017, except that a
property owner may connect if that owner pays the fee as calculated under the
terms defined in Ordinance No. 13-311, passed December 23, 2013, before
December 15, 2016.
(Ord. 13-311, passed 12-23-13; Ord. 16-102, passed 4-12-16)
 
915.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The Services Director shall within a reasonable time, report the estimate to
the City Commission in writing, after which the Commission may proceed with the
issuance of the right and license to construct such sewer above referred to.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.
 
915.04  FEES; SEWER FUND.
   The fee provided to be paid in Section
915.02 shall be in addition to all other fees, charges or deposits now or
hereafter provided by law to be paid or deposited for the making of such taps
or connections and construction of sewers, and the doing of other work
incidental thereto.  All fees payable hereunder shall be deposited in the Sewer
Fund which is hereby established.  The Fund shall be used for the maintenance
and repair of the City sewer system, and for no other purpose whatsoever.  The
Director of Finance shall make a report annually of the receipts and
disbursements of this Fund to the City Commission.
(Ord. 67-199.  Passed 9-25-67.)
 
915.05  LICENSING SEWER TAPPERS.
   No person shall engage in or carry on the business of building house
connections with sewers or of tapping sewers within the City until he has
obtained a license from the Health Commissioner in accordance with law and the
provisions of this chapter.  Such license shall be issued by the Health
Commissioner in the manner herein provided for, and the fee therefor, for each
person, shall be forty dollars ($40.00) to the Clark County Combined Health
District.  Such licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year succeeding
the date of issue and shall be renewable annually upon the payment of the
license fee and the renewal of the bond.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
915.06  EXAMINATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the work or business of constructing house
connections with sewers or tapping sewers shall apply to the Health
Commissioner for a license for such purpose, and shall pay forty dollars
($40.00) to the Clark County Combined Health District to take a sewer tappers
examination.  The Health Commissioner shall examine such applicant as to his
practical knowledge of constructing house connections with sewers and of
tapping sewers and if satisfied of the competency and reliability of such
person to do such work, shall issue to him a license authorizing him to engage
in the work or business of constructing house connections with sewers and of
tapping sewers upon his compliance with the conditions hereinafter stated.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
915.07  BOND REQUIRED; REVOCATION.
   Every person, before receiving the license aforesaid, shall enter into a
bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) with sureties to the approval
of the City Manager, conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the
City from all accidents, liability and damage of every kind and nature caused
by his negligence either in the execution of or protection of his work or for
any unfaithfulness or inadequate work done under and by virtue of his license
and that such licensee will comply with all ordinances of the City and all
rules and regulations now in force or hereinafter provided.  The City Manager
may revoke any license for any violation of any of the ordinances of the City
or for the violation of any rules and regulations or for any cause which the
City Manager may deem just and proper.
 
915.08  UNLICENSED SEWER TAPPING.
   No house connections with sewers shall be made and no sewer shall be tapped
except by a person having a license as hereinbefore provided, and all house
connections with sewers, and all sewer tapping shall be done under and
according to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the City Manager.
(Ord. 67-199.  Passed 9-25-67.)
 
915.09  SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to connect the sewage
systems of two or more separate dwelling houses to one sewer connection.  Each
individual structure shall be connected with a sewer located in the street or
right of way, if such a sewer is available.
(Ord. 67-199.  Passed 9-25-67.)
 
915.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 916
Use of Public Sewers
 
(Entire Chapter
916 amended by Ordinance No. 19-126, passed May 7, 2019.)
 
916.01   Definitions.
916.02   Use of Public Sewers.
916.03   Obligations of Dischargers - Application and Reports.
916.04   Obligations of Dischargers - Facilities and Equipment.
916.05   Issuance of Local Permit
916.06   Fees.
916.07   Prohibitions.
916.08   Enforcement.
916.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Compulsory sewer connections—see Ohio R.C. 729.06
Sewer regulations—see Ohio R.C. 729.51
Untreated sewage—see Ohio R.C. 3701.59
Private sewage disposal systems—see OAC Ch. 3701.29
 
916.01  DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Act" means the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) as amended.
   (b)   "BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the carbonaceous and nitrogenous biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty
degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
   (c)   "Best Management Practice" (BMP):  Any schedule of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in OAC 3745-3-04.  BMP's also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
   (d)   CBOD (Denoting Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty
degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
   (e)   "Categorical Pretreatment Standards" means the National Pretreatment
Standards of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) specifying quantities
or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged
or introduced into the Springfield POTW by specific industrial dischargers.
   (f)   "CFR" means code of federal regulations.
   (g)   "Chronic violation" means that sixty six percent (66%) or more of the
measurements in a six (6) month period have exceeded the limits in the Local
Permit issued by the City to the Discharger as measured at a monitoring point
designated in the Local Permit.
   (h)   "Combined sewer" means a sewer designated to receive both surface
runoff and sewage.
   (i)   "Compatible pollutant" shall mean pollutants which the treatment plant
was designed to treat which are BOD, suspended solids, fecal coliform,
phosphorous and ammonia.
   (j)   "Composite wastewater sample" means a combination of individual
samples of water or wastewater taken at selected intervals, either time
proportional or flow proportional, as to minimize the effect of the variability
of the individual sample.  The individual aliquots comprising the time and flow
proportional samples will be of roughly equal volume.
   (k)   "Director" means the Director of the Service Department of the City,
or the Director's authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   (l)   "Industrial discharger" means any non-residential user who releases
any effluent into the POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force
mains, construction drainage ditches, intercepting ditches, and all constructed
devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
   (m)   "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispersing of food, and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
   (n)     "Grab Sampling:" An individual sample, taken at one specific point
in time, and not combined with any other samples taken.
   (o)   "Hazardous waste" means any waste or combination of wastes which pose
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or living organisms
because such wastes are non-biodegradable or persistent in nature or because
they can be biologically magnified, or because they can be lethal, or because
they may otherwise cause or tend to cause detrimental cumulative effects,
including any substance, combination of substances or mixtures as defined as
"hazardous wastes" in 40 CFR Part 261.
   (p)   "High Strength sewage" is defined as sewage containing more than 500
mg/L total Suspended Solids, 400 mg/L BOD, and/or 30 mg/L Ammonia Nitrogen.
   (q)   "Industrial wastes" means the liquid or solid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   (r)   "Industrial user"  means any source of the introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non- domestic source regulated under Section 307 (B)(C)
(D) of the Act.
   (s)   "Interference" means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW,
treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of its NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Air Act,
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, more commonly known as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act), the Toxic Substance Control Act, the
Marine Protection Research And Recovery Act, or any more stringent state
criteria.
   (t)   "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   (u)   "New source or new discharger" means any building, structure, facility
or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed
pretreatment standards under Section 307(C) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
that section, provided that: (1) the building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(2) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or (3) the production or wastewater generating process of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
existing source at the same site.
   (v)   "Normal sewage" is defined as sewage containing not more than 250 mg/
L Suspended Solids, or 200 mg/L BOD, or 15 mg/L Ammonia Nitrogen.
   (w)   "NPDES permit" shall mean the National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit in effect as issued by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
to the City for the operation of the POTW which regulates the strength of the
POTW effluent at its discharge point to the Mad River.
   (x)   "Pass through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
violation of any requirements of the NPDES Permit.
   (y)   "Person" means any individual, firm, company association, society,
corporation, or group.
   (z)   "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in gram equivalents per liter of solution.
   (aa)   "POTW" means Publicly Owned Treatment Works or any sewage treatment
works and the sewers and conveyances appurtenances discharging thereto, owned
and operated by the City of Springfield.
   (bb)   "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amounts of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
   (cc)   "Pretreatment regulations" is defined as a discharge limit related to
pretreatment that is imposed on an industrial discharger by the Ohio
Administrative Code Chapter 3745-3, Chapter 916 of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of Springfield, Ohio, any control mechanism (including a Local
Permit), categorical pretreatment standards, prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to rule 3745-3-04 of the Ohio Administrative Code, local
limits established pursuant to paragraph (C)(4) of rule 3745-3-03 and paragraph
(D) of rule 3745-3-04 of the Ohio Administrative Code, and any enforceable
schedule designed to achieve compliance with such limit.
   (dd)   "Priority pollutant" means any of the pollutants classified by the
USEPA in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix D, and amendments.  These generally consist
of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds, pesticides, poly-chlorinated
biphenols and metals.
   (ee)   "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
   (ff)   "Public sewer" means a sewer which is controlled by public authority.
   (gg)   "Regulated industrial categories" means those categories defined in
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) as being regulated.
   (hh)   "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   (ii)   "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   (jj)   "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   (kk)   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   (ll)   "Significant Non-Compliance" means a violation which remains
uncorrected forty five (45) days after notification of noncompliance; which is
part of a pattern of noncompliance over a twelve month period, either chronic
violations or technical review criteria violations; which involves a failure to
accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the POTW exercising its
emergency authority under 40 CFR, Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B). 
   (mm)   "Significant industrial user" means all categorical industries and
any non-categorical industry that has either, 1) a discharge averaging 25,000
gallons per day of process wastewater per billing period, or 2) discharges less
than 25,000 GPD [determined by the average daily discharge per billing period]
and contributes a process consistent waste-stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
treatment plant and/or 3) has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the
director, to adversely affect the POTW.
   (nn)   "Slug" means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge that has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.  The results of these activities shall be made available to
the director upon request. 
   (oo)   "Storm sewer" means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   (pp)   "Suspended solids" means any solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   (qq)   "Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations" means that thirty three
percent (33%) or more of all the measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six month period have equaled or exceeded the product of the
daily maximum limit or average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4
for fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH) as
measured at a monitoring point designated in the Local Permit.
   (rr)   "TKN" means Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen determined by the kjeldahl method
as nitrogen in the form of organic proteins and/or their decomposition product
ammonia expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
   (ss)   "Total Toxic Organics" (TTO) means the sum of masses or
concentrations of specific toxic organic compounds found in the industrial
discharger's process discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L.  Each
categorical standard is listed in 40 CFR Part 403, the specific toxic organic
compounds that are to be included in the summation to define TTO for the
category.  If the industry is not defined under the categorical standards, then
total toxic organics means the organic constituents that are considered federal
priority pollutants.
   (tt)   "Toxic pollutants" means those substances considered by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency as priority pollutants.
   (uu)   "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which a discharger
unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of non-compliance with the
standards set forth in this ordinance due to factors beyond the reasonable
control of the discharger, and  excluding non-compliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.
   (vv)   "Watercourse" means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   (ww)   "Wastewater Treatment Plant" means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   (xx)   "Non-polar fat, grease, and oil material" means that portion of the
Hexane Extractable Material (HEM) not absorbed by silica gel used in USEPA
testing Method 1664A.
   (yy)   "Polar fat, grease, and oil material" means that portion of the
Hexane Extractable Material (HEM) that is absorbed by silica gel used in USEPA
testing Method 1664A.
916.02  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
         (a)     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.  All existing connections allowing such discharge may be
reviewed and approved or rejected by the Director upon consideration of the
resulting hardships and related factors.
 
         (b)   Non-contact cooling water may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.  Non-contact cooling water may be discharged to a combined
sewer only with approval of the Director.
 
   (c)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids, or gasses which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
sewer system or the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including, but not
limited to, waste-streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees
Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test method specified in 40 CFR
261.21. Prohibited substances include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, alcohols, bromates, carbides, hydrides, perchlorates,
sulfides and any other substance which the City, the state, or EPA has notified
the user is a fire hazard or hazard to the system.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous pollutants as
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to human or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, wood, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
flashings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing objectionable or toxic substances
in excess of the allowable limits determined by the Director and listed in the
"Index of Restricted Substances" posted at the Wastewater Treatment Plant, the
City Service Center and on the City's website.
      (6)  Any waters or wastes which may cause the POTW to exceed NPDES Permit
conditions.
 
   (d)    No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in
any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge
to partially or completely substitute adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the standards set forth in this ordinance.
 
   (e)  No person shall discharge any hazardous wastes to the POTW by truck,
rail, or dedicated pipeline. Industrial dischargers are required to notify the
POTW if they are disposing of any Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes, as defined in 40 CFR 261, by
discharging it into the POTW. Exempt from this notification requirement are
these industrial dischargers who discharge 15 kilograms or less per month of
non-acute hazardous wastes.  All industrial dischargers shall promptly notify
the Director in advance of any substantial changes in the volume or character
of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the industrial discharger has submitted initial
notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).
 
   (f)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of sewage treatment process, capability of the POTW, and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit, or 65 degrees Celsius at the discharge point into the sewer and/or
any temperature which would cause the POTW to have an influent temperature of
104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Celsius at any time.
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit,
or between 0 degrees and 65 degrees Celsius.
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipment with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Director.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor producing substances
in such concentrations as exceed limits which may be established by any State,
Federal, or other public agency having jurisdiction over the discharge of such
substances to the receiving waters.
      (6)   Any radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      (7)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (A)   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residue) or of dissolved
solids, (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
         (B)   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tapping solutions.
         (C)   Unusual requirements of BOD, suspended solids, or chlorine
demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the POTW.
         (D)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in
916.01(nn).
      (8)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet
the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge of
such substances to the receiving waters or will contaminate the sludge thereby
rendering it unsuitable for reclamation. 
 
   (g)    No discharger subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)
shall fail to meet by the applicable standards.
 
916.03  OBLIGATIONS OF DISCHARGERS - APPLICATION AND REPORTS.
   (a)   All persons proposing to connect to or discharge sewage, industrial
wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall submit a utility service application
to the City of Springfield before connection or discharging to the POTW.  In
addition, all industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or contribute to
the POTW shall complete and file with the City a Baseline Monitoring Report and
any other pertinent documents deemed by the City as being necessary to
determine discharge characteristics and flow. If, in the opinion of the
Director, an industrial discharger is required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit, known as a Local Permit, the Baseline Monitoring Report may be used as
the application.  Additionally, if in the opinion of the Director, an
industrial discharger is required to develop a slug discharge control plan, the
plan must be submitted and approved before the permit may be approved.  This
plan must be reviewed and updated each time the permit is renewed. The slug
discharge plan must include, but is not limited to the following:
      (1)     Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under paragraph (B) of
rule 3745-3-04 of the Administrative Code, with procedures for follow-up
written notification within five days;
      (4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of wastewater
discharge, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
   The Local Permit will be issued to a specific user for a specific
operation.  The Local Permit is non-transferable and shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation.  Any succeeding owner or user shall also apply for a new
Local Permit.  The City of Springfield has the right to disapprove permit
applications for new dischargers or increases to existing loadings before
discharges actually commence. The City has the right to revoke existing permits
should it become necessary to protect the POTW or its discharge points or for
violations of this ordinance. No significant industrial user shall discharge
into any City sewer, whether directly or indirectly, without a Local Permit. 
Should changes occur to the significant industrial user's operation or any
system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater, that
user must notify the Director at least thirty (30) days in advance, and request
that a new permit be issued.
 
   (b)   All existing and new industrial dischargers will submit a Baseline
Monitoring Report within 90 days after connection to the sanitary sewer system.
The report shall be in such form as prescribed by the Director and shall
include such information as the Director shall require. 
   The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not what additional
operating and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment requirements.  All
sampling requirements must meet the standards in
916.03(f).
 
   (c)   In addition to the report in subsection
916.03(b), each industrial discharger regulated by the Federal Categorical
pretreatment standards as promulgated by the USEPA shall submit to the City
within ninety (90) days of initial discharge and on a bi-annual basis, a
compliance report. This compliance report shall be in such form as prescribed
by the Director and shall include such information as the Director shall
require.
   All sampling shall be performed as outlined in subsection
916.03(f). 
   If any significant industry that is required to self-monitor analyzes any
pollutant more frequently than required by its discharge permit, using approved
analytical methods as specified herein, the results of such monitoring shall be
included in the following compliance reports. If any self-monitoring, results
show a violation of this ordinance then the discharger must notify the City
within twenty-four (24) hours after becoming aware of the violation and must
resample for the parameters in violation and report the results to the POTW
within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the initial violation.
 
   (d)  Any discharger subject to this ordinance shall, if deemed necessary by
the City, submit to the Director a quarterly report indicating the nature and
concentration of all substances prohibited or regulated by this ordinance or
Federal Categorical
   Pretreatment Standards that are contained in its discharge and the average
and maximum daily flows in gallons.
 
   (e)   In the event any substance, material, slug, upset, water or waste the
discharge of which is prohibited by subsection
916.02(d) and subsection
916.02(e) herein is discharged into the sewer system, the person responsible
for such discharge shall notify the City immediately, and in no case later than
one (1) hour following such discharge, by calling the emergency number
provided. The person responsible for such discharge shall report to the
Director in writing within five (5) days after the discharge as to the cause,
action taken, and measures taken to prevent such occurrences from happening
again. All costs incurred to correct any damage resulting from such discharge
shall be charged to the discharger and any person responsible for such
discharge. Each such discharge shall be considered separately and costs and
charges shall be levied accordingly. Failure of the person responsible for such
discharge to report it, or to institute such corrective measures as are
necessary to prevent a subsequent discharge after having been notified in
writing by the City to do so and having been given a reasonable time in which
to institute such measures, may result in the sewer through which such
discharge enters the public sewer being disconnected from the public sewer. A
sewer disconnected under this provision will not be reconnected until, in the
opinion of the Director, appropriate corrective measures have been implemented.
 
   (f)   All analyses required by this Chapter shall be performed by the
discharger, or by his agent, in accordance with 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments
thereto. Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the most recent
publication of the USEPA, "Sampling And Analysis Procedures For Screening Of
Industrial Effluents For Priority Pollutants", and/or the USEPA manual "Methods
For Chemical Analysis For Water And Wastes" and/or the American Public Health
Association "Standard Methods For the Examination Of The Water And Wastewater"
and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedure
approved by the administrator of the USEPA or Ohio EPA.  All measurements,
tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined at the control structure
(per the Local Permit and/or subsection
916.04(c)) provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control structure.
In the event that no special structure has been required, the control structure
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried
out by the customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
twenty-four hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Samples will be collected by
and analyzed by personnel assigned by the City for that duty. Additionally,
when flow-measuring equipment has been required to be installed, sampling shall
be completed using the flow proportional method for those parameters requiring
composite sampling.
      (1)   The following analytes shall utilize the "grab" sample technique: 
Cyanide (Total and Free), Hexavalent Chromium, Oil and Grease (Total, Non-Polar
and Polar), pH, Total Phenols and Volatile Organic Compounds.  All other
analytes shall utilize the "Composite" sample technique, using time or flow
proportional sampling as required.
      (2)   All samples shall be representative of the discharge and taken
during normal facility operations.
 
   (g)   All reports required under this section shall include the following
certification statement: "I certify that under penalty of law that this
document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly
gathered and evaluated the information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." All reports that
are more than forty five (45) days late shall require that the Sewer User be
found in Significant Non-Compliance.  All reports shall be signed by a manager
that:
      (1)   Is authorized to make managerial decisions that govern the
operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit
duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and;
      (2)   Initiates and directs other comprehensive measures, to assure the
long-term environmental compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
      (3)   Can ensure that the necessary systems are established or that the
necessary actions are taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements and;
      (4)   Is assigned or delegated the authority to sign documents in
accordance with corporate procedures.
 
   (h)   The City, at its discretion, may issue Monitoring Waivers to
Categorical Industrial Sewer Users. Monitoring Waivers will not be issued to
Centralized Waste Treatment facilities as regulated and defined in 40 CFR 437. 
These waivers allow dischargers subject to a waiver to forego sampling and
analyzing for certain pollutants, as identified by the City and regulated by
categorical pretreatment standards, under the following conditions:
      (1)   Those pollutants not already exempted by other certification
processes and/or requirements established by the City;
      (2)   If a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be
present based on changes that occur in the industrial discharger's operations,
the discharger shall be required to immediately notify the City in writing and
begin monitoring that pollutant at the frequency specified in the City's
pretreatment program.
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial discharger must provide the following:
         (A)   An analysis of four (4) consecutive samples of process
wastewater, prior to any treatment process present at the facility that is
representative of normal operations.   
         (B)   Non-Detectable sample results may only be used as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present only if procedures from
subsection
916.03(f) of this ordinance is followed and;
         (C)   The lowest method detection limit for that pollutant was used.
      (4)   These waivers must be requested by an industrial sewer Discharger. 
If approved by the City, the waivers will be included in the respective Local
Permits.  Dischargers issued a Monitoring Waiver will still be responsible for
meeting the limits of those parameters whose monitoring has been waived. 
Monitoring Waivers will expire with the related Local Permit. A new waiver may
be granted in conjunction with a new Local Permit.
      (5)    A Monitoring Waiver may be revoked due to a change in industrial
activity, upon receipt of results indicating that any waived parameter has
exceeded the respective limit, or any other reasonable basis.
      (6)     Any industrial discharger granted a Monitoring Waiver must
include the following language on each compliance report:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the pretreatment standards under 40 CFR [specify applicable
national pretreatment standard part or parts], I certify that, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of [list
pollutant or pollutants] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since submittal of the last periodic report under paragraph (E) of
rule 3745-3-06 of the Administrative Code."
   (i)   All dischargers subject to this ordinance shall retain and preserve
for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda,
reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to
monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis made by or on the behalf of a
discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to
matters which are subject to administration adjustment or any other enforcement
or litigation activities brought by the City of Springfield pursuant hereto
shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement
activities have concluded and all periods of limitations with respect to any
and all appeals have expired.
 
   (j)   Information and data furnished to the City of Springfield with respect
to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or
other governmental agencies without restriction unless the discharger
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Law
Director that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
proprietary information of the discharger. Information deemed to be trade
secrets by the Law Director shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this ordinance, the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal System Permit and/or the
pretreatment programs.
 
   (k)   The Director reserves the right to issue General Permits for those
industries that discharge similar types of wastes, have substantially similar
types of operations, require the same effluent limitations and require the same
or similar monitoring.  These General Permits shall not be issued to
significant industrial users or industrial dischargers whose limits are based
on pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day.
 
916.04  OBLIGATIONS OF DISCHARGERS - FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
   (a)   If the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is required by this
Chapter, then the design and installation of the plants and equipment required
shall be subject to the Director's approval. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided, when in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing harmful ingredients; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
 
   (b)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
 
   (c)   When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure
together with such necessary meters, flow measuring devices and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the City. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
 
916.05  ISSUANCE OF LOCAL PERMIT.
   (a)   Upon determination by the Director that a discharger or prospective
discharger has fulfilled all obligations with regard to the issuance of a Local
Permit, the Director shall issue such Local Permit.
 
   (b)   The Local Permit may contain conditions that the Director reasonably
determines are necessary to achieve compliance with this Chapter, such as
requiring the adoption of one or more BMP's, requiring the discharger to
install and maintain additional pretreatment equipment or to conduct additional
monitoring and reporting.
 
916.06  FEES.
   (a)   Every industrial discharger which discharges "High Strength sewage"
rather than, or in addition to "Normal sewage", either directly or indirectly,
into the POTW shall be charged and pay a sewer system surcharge in addition to
the sewerage service charge.  Every person discharging sewage into the POTW
having a concentration of any one or more of the sewage constituents described
in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph (a), which is more than two (2) times the
"Normal sewage" value of that sewage constituent, as defined in subsection
916.01(v), shall be charged a base surcharge  for the billing period. The
surcharge will apply at all volumes discharged during a billing period above
15,000 gallons per day and shall be determined by the average daily discharge
per billing period. Every person discharging sewage into the POTW having a
concentration of any one or more of the sewage constituents described in
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph (a), which is more than seven and one half
(7.5) times the "High Strength sewage" value for that sewage constituent, as
defined in subsection
916.01(p), (i.e. a Slug or sometimes called a "Slug Load"), shall be charged an
enhanced surcharge for the billing period.
      (1)   The amount of the surcharge shall be based on the levels of the
following three sewage constituents pertinent to the wastewater being
discharged into the POTW:
         (A)   Total Suspended Solids (TSS)
         (B)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD)
         (C)   Ammonia Nitrogen (NH3)
      (2)   Surcharges imposed under this paragraph (a) shall be calculated
based on all constituent values over the "High Strength sewage" value for the
concentration values for the sewage constituents described in subparagraph (1)
of this paragraph (a) discharged by the customer during the billing period, as
determined by use of the applicable formulas shown below.
 
 
"High Strength sewage” Formula:
SC1 = Q x (CV – SL - HSS) x 8.34 x SCR
“Slug Load” Formula:
SC2 = Q x SL x 8.34  x (SCR x 4)
Wherein:
   SL = Surchargeable Slug Load concentration (mg/L).
   SL = CV – SLV
   (When SL is less than or equal to zero, the SL value used in the above
formulas shall be zero.)
   SC1 = Surcharge for a constituent’s High Strength sewage concentration ($).
   SC2 = Total charge for Slug Load surcharge for concentration ($).
   Q = Total quantity of the waste flow million gallons (MG).
   CV = Constituents concentration from sampling (mg/L).
   HSS = High Strength sewage value for constituent (mg/L).
         CBOD =    400 mg/L
         TSS       =    500 mg/L
         NH3    =     30 mg/L
   SLV = Slug Load value for constituent (mg/L)
         CBOD =    3000 mg/L
         TSS    =    3750 mg/L
         NH3    =     225 mg/L
   SCR = Base rate of surcharge per pound for constituent ($).
 
 
 
Table Of Base Rates Of Surcharge
Per Pound For Constituent
                     High Strength sewage Slug Load value
CBOD Surcharge per Lb $0.16                $0.64
TSS Surcharge per Lb  $0.13                $0.52
NH3 Surcharge per Lb  $0.60                $2.40
 
The total of all surcharges imposed under this paragraph (a) for a billing
period shall be the sum of SC1 plus SC2 computed for each of the three
constituents listed in subsection
916.06(a)(1) [this may require six calculations and the summation of six
surcharge numbers].  Surcharge amounts will be added to the discharger's bill
for the billing period.
      (3)   The measurements described in subsection
916.06(a)(2) shall be analytical measurements determined from samples taken
from discharge points determined by the City at such a time or times, of such
duration and in such a manner as the City may elect.
      (4)   If for any one or more of the sewage constituents described in
subsection
916.06(a)(1) the mass amount of the sewage constituent discharge for a sample
is equivalent to five percent (5%) or more of the POTW Average Headworks
Loading for that sewage constituent, as defined herein, the Director may
establish a compliance schedule under which the customer must reduce the
concentration of the discharged sewage constituent: (a) so that the discharge
of the sewage constituent does not meet the definition of a slug; or (b) to a
maximum mass discharge amount of four percent (4%) of the POTW Average
Headworks Loading, whichever is greater.  POTW Average Headworks Loading is
defined as the average monthly mass amount of each sewage constituent,
described in subsection
916.06(a)(1), received by the POTW, as determined from the latest POTW influent
analysis, less any process recycle loading in the most recent calendar year for
which data is available.
 
916.07  PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
uncover, deface or tamper with sewage works.
 
   (b)   No person shall access the sewer system or POTW for any activity
including discharge of hauled septic or industrial wastes except at the
locations and at times designated by the Director. 
 
   (c)   No person shall remove a manhole lid, or otherwise access the sewer
system for the purpose of discharging wastes at times and/or locations other
than those designated by the Director, or without the express permission of the
Director.
 
916.08  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The Director and other authorized employees of the City with proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter at reasonable times
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Director or his representative shall be given access to and allowed to copy any
records, forms, or reports necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable
discharge requirements, hazardous waste requirements and pretreatment
requirements which shall include, but not be limited to, any hazardous wastes
manifests, chemical inventories, solid or liquid disposal reports, material
safety data sheets (MSDS), discharge analysis, or any other related records. 
The Director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers and waterways or facilities for waste treatment.  They
shall observe all safety regulations which are applicable to the premises.
 
   (b)   Whenever the Director or his agent finds that any industrial
discharger has violated or is violating this ordinance, or a wastewater permit,
or order issued hereunder, the Director or his agent may serve upon said user a
written notice of violation.  Within ten (10) working days of the receipt date
of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted to the Director or his agent. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after the
receipt of the notice of violation.
 
   (c)  If the Director determines that the violation did not occur, the
Director shall notify the discharger of that determination.
 
   (d)   If the Director determines that the violation occurred and that the
discharger's corrective plan is reasonable and appropriate, the Director may
(1) issue a civil penalty or fine under subsection
916.99 (a) or (b), (2) approve the corrective plan, or (3) both. Approved
corrective plans shall become part of the discharger's Local Permit.
 
   (e)   If the Director determines that the violation occurred and that the
Discharger has failed to submit a reasonable and appropriate corrective plan,
the Director may issue an order to the Discharger to show cause why enforcement
action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the violation(s) to be considered, available
enforcement actions, and requiring that the user show cause why available
enforcement action should not be taken.  The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
principal executive, general partner of corporate officer.  Whether or not a
duly notified industrial discharger appears as noticed, immediate enforcement
action may be pursued.
 
   (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b-e) above, the
Director may immediately suspend the wastewater treatment services of a
discharger when it reasonably appears to the Director that an actual or
threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to
the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment,
interfere with the operation of the POTW, violate any pretreatment limits
imposed by this ordinance or a Local Permit issued pursuant to this ordinance.
 
   (g)   The City of Springfield may revoke the Local Permit and/or disconnect
the service of any discharger which:
      (1)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge in any baseline, quarterly or any other
required report;
      (2)   Fails to report significant changes in the wastewater constituents
or characteristics;
      (3)   Refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by
representatives of the City of Springfield for the purpose of inspecting or
monitoring;
      (4)   Violates the conditions of its Local Permit, or this ordinance, or
any final judicial order entered with respect thereto.
 
   (h)  Any Discharger notified of the revocation or suspension of the City's
wastewater treatment service shall within a period of time, as determined by
the City, cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the
City shall disconnect service lines from the main sewer system and may commence
judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order. The
City shall reinstate the wastewater Discharger's service and/or Local Permit
when the Director is reasonably satisfied that the threat of imminent or
substantial danger has been eliminated.
 
   (i)  Whenever an industrial discharger has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this ordinance or an order or Local Permit issued hereunder,
water service to the industrial discharger may be severed and service will only
recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its
ability to comply.
 
916.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Civil Penalties.
      (1)   A person who violates subsection
916.02(b), is subject to a Class A civil penalty as described in §
1324.02 of these Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   A person who fails to submit a timely and adequate report as
required in §
916.03 (b), (c), (d) or (e), or fails to comply with the conditions of the
Local Permit authorized in subsection
916.05(b) is subject to a Class C civil penalty as described in §
1324.04 of these Codified Ordinances.
 
   (b)    Civil Fines. A person violating any provision of this Chapter 916
other than those listed in Section
916.99(a) may be assessed a civil fine not to exceed $1,000 for each
violation.  Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.  The Director shall determine the amount of the fine in accordance
with the discharger's history of compliance or non-compliance with this Chapter
916, the severity of the violation and the amount of harm threatened or caused
by the violation.
 
   (c)    A person who desires to dispute a civil penalty or fine must file a
request with the Director to reconsider the fine within ten (10) days of being
notified of the fine.  The Director shall convene a hearing on the matter
within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for reconsideration. The
Director's determination shall be final, and appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas in accordance with Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (d)   Criminal Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance,
or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
      (2)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance,
or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this ordinance, who has been convicted of a
violation of §
916.99(a) within the previous five (5) years is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
 
   (e) Restitution.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter and thereby
causes any expense, loss or damage to the City or its property is liable to the
City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the violation including
those costs assessed by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and/or The
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The Law Director is authorized to collect
such expense, loss or damage through civil action.
 
   (f)    Publication. At least annually, the Director shall publish a list of
all industrial dischargers which, at any time during the previous twelve
months, were in  Significant Non-Compliance.  For the purpose of this
provision, an industrial discharger is in Significant Non-Compliance if its
violations meet one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   For significant industrial users at any permitted discharge point,
any Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits;
      (2)   For significant industrial users at any permitted discharge point,
any Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations;
      (3)   For all industrial dischargers, any  other violation of
pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the
Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other dischargers,
interferences or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or general public);
      (4)   For all industrial discharger, any discharge of a pollutant that
has caused imminent endangerment of human health, welfare or to the environment
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   For all industrial dischargers, any failure to meet, within ninety
(90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in
a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
      (6)   For all industrial dischargers, any failure to provide, within
forty five (45) after the due date, required reports such as Baseline
Monitoring Reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   For all industrial dischargers, any failure to accurately report
noncompliance;
      (8)   For all industrial dischargers, any other violation or group of
violations which the Director determines will or has adversely affected the
operation or implementation of the City's pretreatment program.
 
   (g)    Injunctive Relief. In addition to pursuing the remedies and penalties
set forth above, the Law Director may seek injunctive or other remedies when a
Discharger has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
ordinance, a condition of the Discharger's permit or an order issued this
Chapter.
 
   (h)   If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words and sections shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 917
Sewerage Charges
 
(Entire Chapter amended by Ordinance No. 12-220, passed July 17, 2012.)
 
917.01   Service charge levied.
917.02   Service charge rates.
917.03   Payment of service charge.
917.04   Collection of pay service charge.
917.05   Failure to pay service charge.
917.06   Establishment and use of sewer fund.
917.07   Definitions.
917.08   Water shutoff for non-payment of sewer bill; exceptions.
917.09   Late payments.
917.10   Rate assessments.
917.11   Septage discharge fees.
917.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Sewerage rates—see Ohio R.C. 729.49
Weekly deposit of sewer rentals collected—see Ohio R.C. 729.52
Definitions—see S.U. & P.S.
911.01
Sewer tapping fee—see S.U. & P.S.
915.02
 
917.01  SERVICE CHARGE LEVIED.
   (a)   To provide necessary funds for equipment, personnel, and other
expenses in connection with the providing of sewer services by the City, the
City Manager is hereby directed to charge and collect a sewer service charge
from every owner of a premises at the rates set forth in Section
917.02.
 
   (b)   It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City,
to levy and collect service charges or rentals upon all lots, lands and
premises served by having connections with the sewage system and by the sewage
treatment and disposal works of the City, the proceeds of such charges or
rentals so derived to be for the use of the sewage system and the treatment and
disposal works of the City as now or hereafter provided.
 
   (c)   The definitions contained in Section
911.01 shall be applicable to this chapter.
 
917.02  SERVICE CHARGE RATES.
   For the purpose as provided in Sections
917.01 and
917.06, there is levied and assessed upon such premises having any sewer
connection with the sewage system of the City or otherwise discharging sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly
into the City sewage system, and upon the owner of such premises, a sewage
service charge or rental at rates to be in effect and payable as hereinafter
provided, and in the amount, as applicable, to be determined as follows:
       (a)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within
the JEDD, and having any connection with the sewage system or otherwise
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either
directly or indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or
rental shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the
same is measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Inside City Rate Effective January 1, 2017
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 3.40 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.       2.89 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 2.87 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (e) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (b)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Outside City Rate Effective January 1, 2017
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 6.80 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     5.78 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 5.74 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (e) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (c)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within Springfield Township, and having any connection with the sewage system
or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial, wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the
service charge or rental shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon
or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in use and any
increases in such quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Springfield Township Residential Rate
Effective January 1, 2017
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 5.10 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.       4.34 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 4.31 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (e) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (d)   The maximum monthly charges for premises containing a one or two-
family dwelling shall be based on the wintertime water usage as measured by the
meter reading in February.  The wintertime water usage shall be used to
determine the sewer charge for the 12 month period beginning in May and
continuing through the following April.  In the event that a February water
meter reading was not taken, or that the February water meter reading when
multiplied by twelve does not reflect the true annual sewer usage, the Director
of Finance shall base the sewer charges on the average monthly usage for the
preceding year or on some other equitable basis which more accurately reflects
the actual sewer usage.  However, in no event shall charges per month be less
than the minimum charges provided for each respective calendar year as shown in
917.02(e).  Premises containing dwellings for three or more families, and
commercial properties shall be charged at the rate set forth in subsections
(a), (b), and (c) hereof.
   (e)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for sewer service. These rates are
effective January 1, 2017.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $  15.76            $  31.52            $  23.64
3/4           19.98                39.96                29.97
1             25.19                50.38                37.79
1-1/2         41.79                83.58                62.69
2             61.16                122.32               91.74
3             131.66               263.32               197.49
4             215.24               430.48               322.86
6             423.61               847.22               635.42
8             846.92               1,693.84             1,270.38
10            1,239.83             2,479.66             1,859.75
12            1,828.42             3,656.84             2,742.63
 
     (f)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and having any connection with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Inside City Rate Effective January 1, 2018
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 4.00 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     3.40 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 3.37 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (j) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (g)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Outside City Rate Effective January 1, 2018
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 8.00 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     6.80 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 6.74 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (j) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (h)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within Springfield Township, and having any connection with the sewage system
or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial, wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the
service charge or rental shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon
or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in use and any
increases in such quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Springfield Township Residential Rate
Effective January 1, 2018
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 6.00 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     5.10 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 5.06 per 100 cu. ft.
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (j) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (i)   The maximum monthly charges for premises containing a one or two-
family dwelling shall be based on the wintertime water usage as measured by the
meter reading in February.  The wintertime water usage shall be used to
determine the sewer charge for the 12 month period beginning in May and
continuing through the following April.  In the event that a February water
meter reading was not taken, or that the February water meter reading when
multiplied by twelve does not reflect the true annual sewer usage, the Director
of Finance shall base the sewer charges on the average monthly usage for the
preceding year or on some other equitable basis which more accurately reflects
the actual sewer usage.  However, in no event shall charges per month be less
than the minimum charges provided for each respective calendar year as shown in
917.02(j).  Premises containing dwellings for three or more families, and
commercial properties shall be charged at the rate set forth in subsections
(f), (g), and (h) hereof.
   (j)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for sewer service. These rates are
effective January 1, 2018.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $  18.42            $  36.84            $  27.63
3/4           23.38                46.76                35.07
1             29.47                58.94                44.21
1-1/2         49.14                98.28                73.71
2             71.81                143.62               107.72
3             154.79               309.58               232.19
4             252.58               505.16               378.87
6             496.62               993.24               744.93
8             996.90               1,993.80             1,495.35
10            1,460.60             2,921.20             2,190.90
12            2,139.25             4,278.50             3,208.88
   (k)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and having any connection with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Inside City Rate Effective January 1, 2019
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 4.65 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     3.96 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 3.93 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (o) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (l)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Outside City Rate Effective January 1, 2019
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 9.30 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     7.92 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 7.86 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (o) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (m)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within Springfield Township, and having any connection with the sewage system
or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial, wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the
service charge or rental shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon
or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in use and any
increases in such quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Springfield Township Residential Rate
Effective January 1, 2019
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 6.98 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     5.94 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 5.90 per 100 cu. ft.
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (o) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (n)   The maximum monthly charges for premises containing a one or two-
family dwelling shall be based on the wintertime water usage as measured by the
meter reading in February.  The wintertime water usage shall be used to
determine the sewer charge for the 12 month period beginning in May and
continuing through the following April.  In the event that a February water
meter reading was not taken, or that the February water meter reading when
multiplied by twelve does not reflect the true annual sewer usage, the Director
of Finance shall base the sewer charges on the average monthly usage for the
preceding year or on some other equitable basis which more accurately reflects
the actual sewer usage.  However, in no event shall charges per month be less
than the minimum charges provided for each respective calendar year as shown in
917.02(o).  Premises containing dwellings for three or more families, and
commercial properties shall be charged at the rate set forth in subsections
(k), (l), and (m) hereof.
   (o)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for sewer service. These rates are
effective January 1, 2019.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $  21.31            $  42.62            $  31.97
3/4           27.12                54.24                40.68
1             34.19                68.38                51.29
1-1/2         57.00                114.00               85.50
2             83.30                166.60               124.95
3             179.56               359.12               269.34
4             293.74               587.48               440.61
6             577.08               1,154.16             865.62
8             1,162.40             2,324.80             1,743.60
10            1,704.30             3,408.60             2,556.45
12            2,481.53             4,963.06             3,722.30
 
   (p)   For any premises situated within the corporate limits or within the
JEDD, and having any connection with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Inside City Rate Effective January 1, 2020
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 5.41 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     4.61 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 4.58 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (t) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (q)   For any premises situated outside the corporate limits except (1)
premises inside the JEDD, or (2) residential premises located in Springfield
Township, and being supplied with the sewage system or otherwise discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the service charge or rental shall be
based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is
measured by the City water meter there in use and any increases in such
quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Outside City Rate Effective January 1, 2020
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 10.82 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     9.22 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 9.16 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (t) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (r)   For any residential premises situated outside the corporate limits and
within Springfield Township, and having any connection with the sewage system
or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial, wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly into the City’s sewage system, the
service charge or rental shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon
or therein as the same is measured by the City water meter there in use and any
increases in such quantity as provided pursuant to Section 916.02.
 
 
Monthly Rates
Springfield Township Residential Rate
Effective January 1, 2020
First 200 cu. ft.       *Minimum Charge
Next 1,500 cu. ft.      $ 8.12 per 100 cu. ft.
Next 31,700 cu. ft.     6.92 per 100 cu. ft.
All over 33,400 cu. ft. 6.87 per 100 cu. ft.
 
*Minimum charge is based on the size of the water meter as set forth in
subsection (t) hereof and includes the 200 cubic feet.
 
   (s)   The maximum monthly charges for premises containing a one or two-
family dwelling shall be based on the wintertime water usage as measured by the
meter reading in February.  The wintertime water usage shall be used to
determine the sewer charge for the 12 month period beginning in May and
continuing through the following April.  In the event that a February water
meter reading was not taken, or that the February water meter reading when
multiplied by twelve does not reflect the true annual sewer usage, the Director
of Finance shall base the sewer charges on the average monthly usage for the
preceding year or on some other equitable basis which more accurately reflects
the actual sewer usage.  However, in no event shall charges per month be less
than the minimum charges provided for each respective calendar year as shown in
917.02(t).  Premises containing dwellings for three or more families, and
commercial properties shall be charged at the rate set forth in subsections
(p), (q), and (r) hereof.
   (t)   Minimum Charges:  the following minimum charges per month based on the
following meter sizes shall be charged for sewer service. These rates are
effective January 1, 2020.
 
 
                                   Premises Outside     Residential Premises
Meter Size In Premises Inside City City Except JEDD or  Both Outside City
Inches        Or Inside JEDD       Residential Premises And Inside
                                   Located Within       Springfield Township
                                   Springfield Township
5/8           $  24.67            $  49.34            $  37.01
3/4           31.46                62.92                47.19
1             39.66                79.32                59.49
1-1/2         66.12                132.24               99.18
2             96.63                193.26               144.95
3             208.29               416.58               312.44
4             340.74               681.48               511.11
6             669.41               1,338.82             1,004.12
8             1,352.38             2,704.76             2,028.57
10            1,976.99             3,953.98             2,965.49
12            2,878.57             5,757.14             4,317.86
 
   (u)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (t) hereof,
one and two-family dwellings which are connected to the City sewage system, but
not to the water system, and for which the Service Director has not required
the installation of a water meter, will be billed at the following rate:
 
Effective January 1, 2017                      Monthly
Inside City Rate                               $ 32.76
Outside City Outside Springfield Township Rate 65.52
Outside City Inside Springfield Township Rate  49.14
Effective January 1, 2018                      Monthly
Inside City Rate                               $ 38.42
Outside City Outside Springfield Township Rate 76.84
Outside City Inside Springfield Township Rate  57.63
Effective January 1, 2019                      Monthly
Inside City Rate                               $ 44.56
Outside City Outside Springfield Township Rate 89.12
Outside City Inside Springfield Township Rate  66.84
Effective January 1, 2020                      Monthly
Inside City Rate                               $ 51.72
Outside City Outside Springfield Township Rate 103.44
Outside City Inside Springfield Township Rate  77.58
 
Service to dwellings serving three or more families, not commercial properties,
shall be charged at a rate to be determined by the City Manager.
   (v)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (t) hereof,
non-residential premises that are connected to the City sewage system, but not
to the water system, and for which the Service Director has not required the
installation of a water meter, will be billed at the following rate:
 
Effective January 1, 2017 Monthly
Inside City Rate          $ 65.64
Outside City Rate         131.28
Effective January 1, 2018 Monthly
Inside City Rate          $ 77.10
Outside City Rate         154.20
Effective January 1, 2019 Monthly
Inside City Rate          $ 89.53
Outside City Rate         179.05
Effective January 1, 2020 Monthly
Inside City Rate          $ 104.03
Outside City Rate         208.07
   (w)   If a lot, parcel of land, building, or premises discharges sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the City sanitary
sewage system, but is not a user of water supplied by the City, the Service
Director may require the owner of such lot to install a meter measuring water
being furnished to the lot in order to measure discharges into the City
sanitary sewer system.  The meter and its installation must be approved by the
Service Director and arrangements satisfactory to the Finance Director must be
made to obtain readings to measure sewer usage and generate an accurate bill. 
The owner’s charges will then be based on the water usage as measured by such
meter at rates set forth in
917.02.
   (x)   If a lot, parcel of land, building or premises, discharges sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the City sanitary sewage
system, but is not a user of water supplied by the City, the owner of such lot
may install a sewer meter or other device on the premises that will more truly
measure discharges into the City sanitary sewer system, provided that  such
sewer meter or other device and its installation have been approved by the
Service Director and arrangements satisfactory to the Finance Director have
been made to obtain readings to measure sewer usage and generate an accurate
bill.
   (y)   If an owner of a lot, parcel of land, building or premises, that
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the
City sanitary sewage system shows to the satisfaction of the Service Director
that the volume of discharges into the City sanitary sewer is not fairly
reflected by the amount of City water used on such lot, the owner of such lot
may install a sewer meter or other device on the premises that will more truly
measure discharges into the City sanitary sewer system, provided that such
sewer meter or other device and its installation have been approved by the
Service Director and arrangements satisfactory to the Finance Director have
been made to obtain readings to measure sewer usage.
   (z)   Voluntarily accepted additional service charges:  The charges
pertaining to a property owner’s allocated share of total costs to design,
construct, and collect costs related to City constructed water utility
improvements benefiting the property and which a property owner has voluntarily
accepted, in writing, as additional service charges.  The voluntarily accepted
additional service charges shall be billed to the customer receiving services a
the property to which the voluntarily accepted additional service charges
apply, regardless of changes in ownership, until paid in full.
   (aa)   No sewage service charge shall be imposed upon premises owned or
operated by either the City of Springfield or by National Trail Parks and
Recreation District.
      (Ord. 13-29, passed 1-22-13; Ord. 15-148, passed 5-25-15; Ord. 15-259,
passed 9-15-15; Ord. 15-337, passed 12-22-15; Ord. 17-287, passed 12-5-17.)
 
917.03  PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge or rental levied and assessed by this chapter shall be
payable in monthly payments, as applicable, in each year; provided, that the
amount of the charge or rental payable for its first payment period after
service begins shall be determined on the basis of a per diem proration of the
minimum charge herein established, except for those cases in which the metered
or measured charge will exceed the minimum.
 
917.04  COLLECTION OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   Each service charge or rental levied pursuant to this chapter shall be
collected by the Finance Director at the same time as bills for water service
are collected, and the City Manager shall make and enforce such bylaws and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient
management and protection of the City sewage system and the sewage treatment
and disposal works, for the construction and use of house sewers and
connections to the sewage system and for the regulations, collection, rebating
and refunding such charges and rentals.
 
917.05  FAILURE TO PAY SERVICE CHARGE.
   Each service charge or rental levied by or pursuant to this chapter is
hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by a
connection with the sewage system of the City and, if the same is not paid
within thirty days after it is due and payable, it shall be certified to the
Auditor of Clark County, who shall place the same on the tax duplicate of the
County, with the interest and penalties allowed by law and be collected as
other taxes are collected.
 
917.06  ESTABLISHMENT AND USE OF SEWER FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of the service charges or rental
authorized by this chapter shall be deposited daily with the Director of
Finance and shall be accounted for and be known as the Sewer Fund and when
appropriated by the City Commission, shall be available for the payment of the
costs and expenses of the management, maintenance and repair of the City sewage
system and the sewage treatment and disposal works and storm sewers, and any
surplus in such Fund shall be used for the payment of the interest on bonds
issued and outstanding or which may be issued to provide funds with which to
pay the City's portion of the costs of constructing such sewage system or part
thereof and such sewage treatment and disposal works, and to retire such bonds
when they mature, and for the enlargement or replacement of the sewage system,
treatment and disposal works and storm sewers.
 
917.07  DEFINITIONS.  (REPEALED)
 
917.08  WATER SHUTOFF FOR NONPAYMENT OF SEWER BILL; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Payment Required Prior to Water Service Resumption.  Where a bill for
a service charge or rental levied and assessed by this chapter has not been
paid as provided by the rules and regulations of the City Manager and the
proper shutoff notice has been delivered, the water shall thereafter be shut
off in accordance with these rules and regulations, it shall not thereafter be
turned on again until all charges due and payable, including advance charges,
if any, are fully paid.
 
   (b)   Application.  This section shall apply whether or not there has been,
in the meantime, a change of ownership or possession of the premises supplied,
except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) hereof.
 
   (c)   Insolvent or Bankrupt Sewer User.  Where premises in arrears for
payment of sewer bills becomes subject to a bankruptcy or insolvency court, the
Service Department may permit the supply of water to such premises to be
continued or restored without previous payment of the sewer bill accrued under
the bankrupt or insolvent owner.
 
   (d)   Foreclosure Proceedings Against Premises Supplied With City Sewer
Services.  Whenever the Department of Finance, Utilities Billing Division, has
been given written notice that foreclosure proceedings have been instituted
against premises supplied with City sewer services, the Department shall
arrange to require deposit payments or other suitable guaranties in advance for
the sewer services furnished to such premises until the premises have been sold
or the proceedings otherwise terminated.  If the Department receives
notification in writing of the pendency of the foreclosure proceedings and the
location of the premises affected thereby prior to such sale, the purchaser at
the foreclosure sale shall be entitled to have sewer services furnished the
premises without payment of charges accrued under the previous owner, for any
period subsequent to the date of the receipt of notice of the pendency of
foreclosure proceedings by the Department.
 
   (e)   Where payments required to be made to the City under a Development
Incentive Agreement or a pre-annexation agreement (i.e. a contract by which a
customer outside of the City’s corporate boundary is provided with municipal
water and/or sewer services) have not been paid as provided under the
Development Incentive Agreement or pre-annexation agreement and the proper
shutoff notice has been delivered, the water shall thereafter be shut off in
accordance with these rules and regulations, and it shall not thereafter be
turned on again until all charges due and payable, including advance charges
and payments required to be made under the Development Incentive Agreement or
pre-annexation agreement, if any, are fully paid.  Where payments required to
be made to the City under a Development Incentive Agreement or a pre-annexation
agreement have not been paid as provided under the Development Incentive
Agreement or pre-annexation agreement and the proper disconnect notice has been
delivered, the property owner’s connection to the City’s public sewer line
shall thereafter be cut off in accordance with these rules and regulations, and
the subject property shall not thereafter be reconnected to the City’s public
sewer line again until all charges due and payable, including advance charges
and payments required to be made under the Development Incentive Agreement or
pre-annexation agreement, if any, are fully paid.
 
917.09  LATE PAYMENTS.
   All sewer charges due from customers under the provisions of the chapter and
remaining unpaid after they have become due shall bear interest at the rate of
one percent (1%) per month or part thereof.
 
917.10  RATE ASSESSMENTS.
   The City Manager shall apply and assess the rates provided herein as they
are in effect on the date the water meter approved by the City in use on the
premises was read.
 
917.11  SEPTAGE DISCHARGE FEES.
   Subject to regulations duly adopted by the City Manager, persons or
companies may use the dumping facility at the Springfield Wastewater Treatment
Plant for truck discharge of residential septic tank waste or other liquid
domestic sanitary waste upon the payment of a registration fee of $50.00 per
entity and a truck inspection fee of $10.00 per truck used by such entity, per
calendar year, or any remaining portion thereof, plus an additional fee of
$33.48 for each 500 gallons of septage or fraction thereof, each time liquid
domestic sanitary waste is dumped. 
   Effective January 5, 2018, the rate for the additional fee shall be $38.50
for each 500 gallons of septage or fraction thereof, each time liquid domestic
sanitary waste is dumped.
   Effective January 1, 2019, the rate for the additional fee shall be $44.28
for each 500 gallons of septage or fraction thereof, each time liquid domestic
sanitary waste is dumped. 
   Effective January 1, 2020, the rate for the additional fee shall be $49.59
for each 500 gallons of septage or fraction thereof, each time liquid domestic
sanitary waste is dumped.
   Liquid domestic sanitary waste discharges shall be billed based on the rated
capacity of the registered truck.
(Ord. 15-337, passed 12-22-15; Ord. 17-287, passed 12-5-17.)
 
917.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails or refuses to comply with any provision of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for each offense.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 918
Stormwater Utility Charges
 
Entire Chapter
918 amended by Ordinance No. 15-164
 
918.01   Establishment of stormwater utility, purposes.
918.02   Definitions.
918.03   Calculation of stormwater utility service charge.
918.04   Stormwater utility service charges; ESU rates.
918.05   Stormwater utility service charge credits.
918.06   Payment of stormwater utility service charge.
918.07   Collection of stormwater utility service charge.
918.08   Failure to pay stormwater utility service charge.
918.09   Late payments.
918.10   Stormwater utility coordinator; appeals.
918.11   Establishment and use of stormwater utility fund.
 
918.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF STORMWATER UTILITY, PURPOSES.
   (a)   There is established in the City a stormwater utility to provide
efficient and effective management and financing of a stormwater system within
the City; to provide a system for mitigating the damaging effects of
uncontrolled and unplanned stormwater runoff; to mitigate and reduce the amount
of stormwater mixed with sanitary sewage and sent to the City’s wastewater
treatment facilities; to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
providing for the safe and efficient capture and conveyance of stormwater
runoff, for the correction of stormwater conditions detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare; to authorize the establishment and implementation
of plans and mechanisms for dealing with stormwater drainage, including design,
coordination construction, management, operation, maintenance and replacement
of stormwater management facilities, inspection and enforcement activities and
administration of the City’s stormwater utility; to establish reasonable
stormwater utility service charges based on each property's contribution of
stormwater runoff to the system and use and benefit of services and facilities
to fund the City’s stormwater system; and to encourage and facilitate urban
water resources management techniques, including detention of stormwater
runoff, enhancing the amount of and use of permeable surfaces, minimization of
the need to construct storm sewers, and the protection of the environment.
 
   (b)   It is determined that the establishment of a stormwater utility is
necessary to enable the City to comply with the unfunded mandates imposed on it
under the federal Clean Water Act and under requirements imposed on the City
under the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit.
 
   (c)   It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and necessary in order to
accomplish the aforementioned purposes that a stormwater utility service charge
shall be made on each lot or parcel in the City from which stormwater drains
and which contributes to stormwater runoff.  Each property's contribution to
runoff shall be the primary consideration in setting the service charge. 
Secondary consideration shall be given to specific or unusual service
requirements of some properties, and special and general benefits accruing to
or from properties as a result of providing their own stormwater runoff
mitigation facilities.
 
   (d)   The City's stormwater utility service charges are intended and
designed to be fair and reasonable and bear a substantial relationship to the
cost of providing service and facilities, regulation of stormwater runoff and
administration of the City’s stormwater utility.  Similar properties shall pay
similar stormwater service charges.  Charges shall reflect the area of each
property and its intensity of development, since these factors bear directly on
the peak rate of stormwater runoff.  Stormwater utility service charge rates
are designed to recover the cost of rendering stormwater service for the time
period under consideration.  The stormwater utility service charge rates are
also established so as to maintain adequate fund reserves to provide for
reasonably expected variations in the cost of providing services, as well as
variations in the demand for services.
(Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of terms provided in Sections
101.02 of the Codified Ordinances shall be applicable to this Chapter; except
as a term is otherwise defined in this section.
   (a)   "Calendar year" means a twelve calendar month period beginning January
1 and ending December 31.
   (b)   “Commercial property” means property with a Stormwater Class of
Commercial.
   (c)   “Condominium property” means property with a Stormwater Class of
Condominium.
   (d)   “Credit” means a reduction in the amount of the stormwater utility
service charge that is levied against a Property.
   (e)   One “Equivalent Stormwater Unit” or “ESU” is equal to 1,898 square
feet of Impervious Area.
   (f)   “ESU Rate” means a fee charge on each ESU.
   (g)   “Gross area” means a total square footage of a parcel as measured by
the Auditor of Clark County, Ohio.
   (h)   “Impervious Area” means the number of square feet of horizontal
surface area covered by buildings and other impervious surfaces.
   (i)   “Impervious Surface” means a surface area which is compacted or
covered with a material that is resistant to infiltration by water or to allow
water to percolate through, including, but not limited to, pavements, most
conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, and any other oiled, graded, or compacted soils, or other surface which
impedes the natural infiltration of surface water. 
   (j)   "Month" or "monthly" means a period of approximately thirty days.
   (k)   “Non-Residential Property” means property with a Stormwater Class of
Commercial, Condominium, or Agricultural.  The term “Non-Residential Property”
includes all property which is not defined as Residential Property under the
definition of Residential Property established in this section.
   (l)   "Owner" means the legal owner of a freehold estate in real property.
   (m)   “Property” means land and buildings together considered as a parcel as
identified by the tax parcel established by the County Auditor.
   (n)   Residential Property means property with a Stormwater Class of
Residential (being property with a residential use and which is a single, two
or three family dwelling, but does not include condominium units).
   (o)   “Runoff Coefficient” means the percentage that is used to estimate the
impervious area for property. The Runoff Coefficient for property with a
Stormwater Class as Agricultural is 10 percent. The Runoff Coefficient for all
other property is 15 percent.
   (p)   “Stormwater Class” means the classification of property as
Residential, Commercial, Condominium, and Agricultural based on the land use
code applied to the property by the Auditor of Clark County and as designated
by the following table:
 
 
Stormwater Class Land Use Code
                 500, 501, 502, 503, 504, 505 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 515,
Residential      520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 530, 531, 532, 533, 534, 535,
                 540, 541, 560, 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 599
                 103, 104, 108, 109, 113, 114, 200, 220, 230, 240, 250, 260,
                 300, 400 401, 402, 403, 410, 411, 412, 415, 416, 419, 420,
                 421, 422, 424, 425, 426, 427, 429, 430, 435, 439, 440, 441,
Commercial       442, 444, 445, 447, 448, 449, 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 460,
                 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 480, 482, 490, 496, 499, 600, 610,
                 620, 630, 640, 645, 650, 660, 670, 680, 685, 690, 700, 710,
                 720, 730, 740, 800, 810, 820, 830, 840, 850, 860, 870, 880,
                 300, 310, 320, 330, 340, 350, 360, 370, 380, 390, 399, 400
Condominium      450, 550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555
Agricultural     101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 100, 110, 111, 112, 115, 116, 117,
                 120, 121, 190, 199
   (q)   “Stormwater Service Charge” means the schedule of user charges created
by this Chapter to operate, maintain, and improve the system and for such other
purposes as stated in this Chapter.
   (r)   “Stormwater System” means the City’s system or network of storm and
surface water management facilities including but not limited to inlets,
conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, gullies, canals, lakes and ponds, curb
and gutter, infiltration facilities, components (or allocated portions of
components) of the City’s wastewater treatment system deemed necessary to treat
wastewater containing stormwater, and other components as well as natural
waterways.
      (Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.03  CALCULATION OF STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   (a)   Residential Property.  There are established five rate tiers for
Residential Property to account for the wide range of the amount of Impervious
Area that exists on individual Residential Property in the City.  The
classification of Residential Property into the five tiers is made based on
calculated impervious area.  The five Residential Property tiers are as
follows:
 
 
Residential Property Tier Amount of Impervious Area
Tier No. 1                1 to 999 square feet of Impervious Area
Tier No. 2                1,000 to 1699 square feet of Impervious Area
Tier No. 3                1,700 to 2099 square feet of Impervious Area
Tier No. 4                2,100 to 3,399 square feet of Impervious Area
Tier No. 5                Over 3,399 square feet of Impervious Area
   (b)   For Residential Property, the monthly Stormwater Service Charge shall
be based on the Residential Property Tiers described in
918.03(a) and the greater amount of impervious area derived from the following:
      (1)   Multiplying the gross area of the property by the Runoff
Coefficient, or
      (2)   Measuring the Impervious Surface on the property.
 
   (c)   For Commercial, Condominium, and Agricultural Properties, the monthly
Stormwater Service Charge shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   Agricultural and Commercial Property. The monthly Stormwater
Service Charge shall be based on the greater number of ESUs derived from the
following:
         A.   The numerical factor obtained by multiplying the gross area of
the property by the Runoff Coefficient and then dividing the above product by
the calculated ESU.  (This division shall be calculated to the second decimal
place.)
         B.   The impervious Surface on the property divided by the ESU. (This
division shall be calculated to the second decimal place.)
      (2)   Condominium Property. The monthly Stormwater Service Charge shall
be based on the ESU derived when the Impervious Surface in the Condominium
Association is the dividend and the total number of parcels in the Condominium
Association is the divisor. (This division shall be calculated to the second
decimal place.)
         (Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.04  STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES; ESU RATES.
   For the purposes identified in Sections
918.01, there is levied and assessed upon all properties in the City and upon
the owner of such premises, a stormwater utility service charge at rates to be
in effect and payable as hereinafter provided, and in the amount, as
applicable, determined as follows:
   (a)   Stormwater utility service charge on Residential Property within the
City’s corporate boundaries:
 
 
Monthly ESU Rate of $1.30 – Effective January 1, 2014
Tier       ESU  Monthly Service Charge
Tier No. 1 0.40 $0.52/month
Tier No. 2 0.75 $0.97/month
Tier No. 3 1.00 $1.30/month
Tier No. 4 1.30 $1.69/month
Tier No. 5 2.00 $2.60/month
 
Monthly ESU Rate of $2.25 – Effective January 5, 2016
Tier       ESU  Monthly Service Charge
Tier No. 1 0.40 $0.90/month
Tier No. 2 0.75 $1.69/month
Tier No. 3 1.00 $2.25/month
Tier No. 4 1.30 $2.92/month
Tier No. 5 2.00 $4.50/month
 
   (b)   The Stormwater utility service charge on Non-Residential Property
within the City’s corporate boundaries is:
 
 
Effective January 1, 2014 $1.30 per ESU per month
Effective January 1, 2016 $2.25 per ESU per month
 
   (c)   Voluntarily accepted additional stormwater utility service charges: 
The charges pertaining to a property owner’s allocated share of total costs to
design, construct, and collect costs related to City constructed stormwater
utility improvements benefiting the property and which a property owner has
voluntarily accepted, in writing, as additional service charges.  The
voluntarily accepted additional stormwater utility service charges shall be
billed to the customer receiving services at the property to which the
voluntarily accepted additional service charges apply, regardless of changes in
ownership, until paid in full.
   (d)   No stormwater utility service charge shall be imposed upon premises
owned or operated by either the City of Springfield or by National Trail Parks
and Recreation District.
      (Ord. 15-259, passed 9-15-15; Ord. 15-336, passed 12-22-15.)
 
918.05  STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE CREDITS.
   (a)   A 100-percent credit shall be allowed for Agricultural lands; with the
exception that no credit shall be allowed for Agricultural lands operated under
an NPDES permit nor for Agricultural lands which have a land use code of 102 or
112.
 
   (b)   Additional credits shall be allowed as provided for in stormwater
utility charge credit policies adopted by the City Commission.
(Ord. 11-352, Passed 12-20-11; Ord. 13-59, Passed 3-5-13; Ord. 15-164, Passed
6-9-15.)
 
918.06  PAYMENT OF STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   (a)   The stormwater utility service charge levied and assessed by this
Chapter shall be payable in payment periods determined by the Finance Director,
as applicable, in each calendar year; provided, that if the charge exceeds
$50.00 per month for a Property, the amount of the charge payable for its first
payment period after service begins shall be determined on the basis of a per
diem proration of the minimum charge herein established, otherwise there shall
be no proration of monthly stormwater utility service charges.
 
   (b)   Notwithstanding all other provisions of the Chapter, public right-of-
way [i.e. government-owned roads (whether or not dedicated), utility easements,
sidewalks, bridges, bike trails, and the like] and railroad track right-of-way
is exempt from the assessment of stormwater utility service charges and no
stormwater utility service charge is required to be paid for such Property.
 
   (c)   It is the intent of this Chapter that the stormwater utility service
charge be imposed only on property that is likely to contribute stormwater to
the Stormwater System.  There is a presumption that all properties in the City
are likely to contribute stormwater to the Stormwater System; however, a
property owner may rebut this presumption by providing evidence to the City’s
Stormwater Utility Coordinator proving that a property is unlikely under any
circumstances to contribute stormwater to the Stormwater System.  In the event
a property owner is able to prove that the property owner’s property is
unlikely under any circumstances to contribute stormwater to the Stormwater
System, then no stormwater utility service charge will be applicable to that
property.
(Ord. 13-59, Passed 3-5-13; Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.07  COLLECTION OF STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   Each stormwater utility service charge levied pursuant to this Chapter shall
be collected by the Finance Director, and the City Manager shall make and
enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe,
economical and efficient management and protection of the City stormwater
system and the City’s sewage treatment and disposal works, for the construction
and use of house rainwater handling systems, drainage, sump pumps, sewers and
connections to the City’s sewage system and for the regulations, collection,
rebating and refunding stormwater utility service charges.
(Ord. 13-59, Passed 3-5-13; Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.08  FAILURE TO PAY STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   (a)   Unpaid Charges Made a Lien. Each stormwater utility service charge
levied by or pursuant to this Chapter is hereby made a lien upon the
corresponding lot, land or premises served by the City’s stormwater system and,
if the same is not paid within thirty days after it is due and payable, it
shall be certified to the Auditor of Clark County, who shall place the same on
the tax duplicate of the County, with the interest and penalties allowed by law
and be collected as other taxes are collected.
 
   (b)   Payment Required Prior to Water Service Resumption.  Where a bill for
a stormwater utility service charge levied and assessed by this Chapter has not
been paid as provided by the rules and regulations of the City Manager and the
proper shutoff notice has been delivered, the water shall thereafter be shut
off in accordance with these rules and regulations, it shall not thereafter be
turned on again until all charges due and payable, including advance charges,
if any, are fully paid.
 
   (c)   Application.  This section shall apply whether or not there has been,
in the meantime, a change of ownership or possession of the Property to which
the stormwater utility service charge pertains, except as provided in
subsections (d) and (e) hereof.
 
   (d)   Insolvent or Bankrupt Sewer User.  Where premises in arrears for
payment of stormwater utility service charges becomes subject to a bankruptcy
or insolvency court, the City Manager may permit the supply of water to such
premises to be continued or restored without previous payment of the stormwater
utility service charge accrued under the bankrupt or insolvent owner.
 
   (e)   Foreclosure Proceedings Against Premises Supplied With City Storm-
water Utility Services.  Whenever the Department of Finance, Utilities Billing
Division, has been given written notice that foreclosure proceedings have been
instituted against Property supplied with City stormwater utility services, the
Department shall arrange to require deposit payments or other suitable
guaranties in advance for the stormwater utility services furnished to such
premises until the premises have been sold or the proceedings otherwise
terminated.  If the Department receives notification in writing of the pendency
of the foreclosure proceedings and the location of the Property affected
thereby prior to such sale, the purchaser at the foreclosure sale shall be
entitled to have stormwater utility services furnished to the Property without
payment of charges accrued under the previous owner, for any period subsequent
to the date of the receipt of notice of the pendency of foreclosure proceedings
by the Department.
(Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.09  LATE PAYMENTS.
   All stormwater utility service charges due from Property owners under the
provisions of the Chapter and remaining unpaid after they have become due shall
bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or part thereof.
(Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
918.10  STORMWATER UTILITY COORDINATOR; APPEALS.
   (a)   Stormwater Utility Coordinator.  The City Manager shall designate a
City employee who shall report to the Service Director or designee and who
shall administer the City's stormwater utility, including;
      (1)   Receiving reviewing and granting or denying applications for
credits,
      (2)   Determining the appropriate Stormwater Class for Properties based
on GIS and land use information collected and maintained by the County Auditor,
      (3)   Using any and all land use data, determining the Impervious Area
measurement for Properties, and
      (4)   Reviewing and granting or denying applications for reconsideration
of ESU multiples, Stormwater Class determinations, determinations of impervious
surface, determinations of whether a property is unlikely under any
circumstances to contribute stormwater to the Stormwater System,  the amount of
a stormwater utility service charge assessed, and other determinations made by
the Stormwater Utility Coordinator.
   (b)   Any person obligated under this Chapter to pay a stormwater utility
service charge to the City may make application to the Stormwater Utility
Coordinator, on application forms to be prescribed by the Stormwater Utility
Coordinator, seeking a credit or seeking a determination of whether a property
is unlikely under any circumstances to contribute stormwater to the Stormwater
System or seeking reconsideration of a determination made by the Stormwater
Utility Coordinator.  The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee
reasonably related to recovering the City's costs expected to be experienced in
processing such applications, as determined by the Finance Director.  The
applicant shall attach to the application any affidavits and/or other
documentary evidence the applicant relies upon to justify the request in the
application and shall fully explain in writing in the application the
applicant's reasons and support for the relief sought.  The Stormwater Utility
Coordinator shall grant or deny the application and issue a written explanation
of the Stormwater Utility Coordinator's decision.
   (c)   Appeals.  An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Stormwater
Utility Coordinator made on an application filed with the City, may file an
appeal with the Service Director or desginee along with a processing fee of
$100.00 for property with a Commercial or Industrial Stormwater Class
designation and $25.00 for property with an Agricultural, Condominium,
Residential, or Vacant Stormwater Class designation; provided that the filing
of the appeal is made within fourteen days after the Stormwater Utility
Coordinator issues his/her decision granting or denying the application.  The
appeal shall be made to a panel comprised of the City Manager, the Finance
Director and the Law Director, or their designees.  The appeal panel shall
consider the provisions of this Chapter, land use data establishing the actual
conditions of the property,  the application and its attachments, the decision
of the Stormwater Utility Coordinator and the contents of the appeal document
in reviewing the Stormwater Utility Coordinator's decision and shall affirm or
reverse or reverse and remand the Stormwater Utility Coordinator's decision. 
The decision of the appeal panel shall be final.  Further appeal shall be to
the Court of Common Pleas.
(Ord. 13-59, Passed 3-5-13; Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15. Ord. 19-289, Passed 12-
10-19.)
 
918.11  ESTABLISHMENT AND USE OF STORMWATER UTILITY FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of the stormwater utility service
charges authorized by this Chapter shall be deposited daily with the City
Treasurer and shall be accounted for and be known as the Stormwater Utility
Revenue Fund and when appropriated by the City Commission, shall be used solely
for the payment of the costs and expenses of design, coordination construction,
management, operation, maintenance and replacement of stormwater management
facilities, inspection and enforcement activities pertaining to the City’s
stormwater system and administration of the City’s stormwater utility and any
surplus in such Fund shall be used for the payment of the principal and
interest on bonds issued or loans obtained and outstanding or which may be
issued to provide funds with which to pay the City’s portion of the costs of
constructing components of such system, and to retire such bonds or loans when
they mature, and for the enlargement or replacement of the stormwater system.
(Ord. 15-164, Passed 6-9-15.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 919
Sanitary Services
919.01   Definitions.
919.02   Solid waste containers.
919.03   Placement of containers for collection.
919.04   Frequency of collection.
919.05   Unlawful accumulation of solid waste.
919.051   Solid waste collection services; provided by owner.
919.06   Disposal of solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous substances.
919.07   Permitting vehicle to stand.
919.08   Nuisance prohibited.
919.09   Powers and duties of City Manager.
919.10   Suitability of sanitation service public utility.
919.11   Sanitary Service Fund.
919.12   Notices.
919.13   Violation citation tags.
919.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
Vehicle loads dropping or leaking - see TRAF.
339.08
Shifting loads; loose loads - see TRAF.
339.09
Littering - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Private refuse collectors - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
921
Solid waste disposal regulations - see OAC Ch. 3745-27
 
919.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and in Chapters
921,
922 and
923:
   (a)   "Solid waste" means garbage, rubbish and such other unwanted residual
solid and semisolid materials as result from industrial, commercial,
agricultural and domestic operations; but excludes dangerous substances and
demolition matter.
      For purposes of this definition, solid wastes includes bulky items such
as automobiles, furniture, bed springs and large appliances.  For purposes of
this definition, "semisolid" means that the material in question, while
cohesive and viscous, slowly flows or loses its shape when unconfined, and does
not readily release liquids, under normal climatic conditions.
   (b)   "Garbage" means all waste matter, solid, liquid or mixed, which
attends, exists, is created or accumulates within the City from the
preparation, cleaning, cooking, use, storage or sale of or dealing in meats,
fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, cereals, grain or other animal, vegetable or
mineral matter designed or intended as foodstuff for human consumption; but
does not include dangerous substances.
   (c)   "Rubbish" means all natural refuse resulting from the use of any
premises as a residence, such as furniture, appliances, parts of furniture or
appliances, ashes, paper, tin cans, bottles, brush, grass, leaves or other
similar substances, or containers, and also sweepings, dirt, paper and other
debris resulting from the use of any premises as a mercantile establishment or
place of business, but does not include any demolition matter or any dangerous
substances.
   (d)   "Dangerous substance" means controlled substances, hazardous
substances, excrement (human or animal), septic tank cleanings and all other
substances that are harmful or inimical to public health.
   (e)   "Demolition matter" means those items affixed to a structure being
constructed or demolished, such as brick, concrete, stone, glass, wallboard,
framing and finishing lumber, roofing materials, plumbing, plumbing fixtures,
wiring and insulation material.
   (f)   "Person" means an individual or group or association of individuals; a
firm or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer, manager,
person in charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying the
masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
   (g)   "Premises" means real property, whether private or public, along with
the structures thereon and that portion of any waterways thereon or contiguous
thereto.
   (h)   "Owner" means the legal owner of a freehold estate in real property.
   (i)   "Calendar year" means a twelve month period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31.
   (j)   "Year" means a period of twelve consecutive calendar months.
   (k)   "Quarter" or "quarterly" means a period of three consecutive calendar
months in any given year.
   (l)   "Residential unit" means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the
City occupied by an individual or group of individuals living together in
common living quarters.  A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when
domestic water services are being supplied thereto.
   (m)   "Residential premises" means premises used as a dwelling within the
corporate limits of the City and containing not more than six residential
units.
   (n)   "Sanitation services" means the collection and disposal of solid waste
and the sweeping of streets.
   (o)   "Sanitation services public utility" means an entity to which the City
has granted a franchise to supply sanitation services to residential premises.
   (p)   "Rear door" means any point located behind the front line of a
building on a residential premises.
   (q)   "Controlled substance" means any drug or other substances, or
immediate precursor, which as a potential for abuse and:
   (1)   Abuse may lead to any physical or psychological dependence, or
   (2)   The drug or other substance has no currently accepted medical use in
treatment in the United States and there is a lack of accepted safety for use
of the drug or other substance under medical supervision.  The term does not
include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco.
   (r)   "Hazardous substances" means any substance or mixture of substances
which:
      (1)   Is toxic,
      (2)   Is corrosive,
      (3)   Is an irritant,
      (4)   Is a strong sensitizer,
      (5)   Is flammable or combustible,
      (6)   Is radioactive and has a capacity to produce personal injury or
illness to man through ingestion, inhalation or absorption through any body
surface, or
      (7)   Generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, if
such substances or mixture of substances may cause substantial personal injury
or substantial illness during or as a proximate result of any customary or
reasonably foreseeable handling or use, including reasonably foreseeable
ingestion by children.
   (s)   "Residential hauler" means an entity to which the City has issued a
residential solid waste collectors license pursuant to Chapter
922.
   (t)   "Commercial hauler" means an entity to which the City has issued a
private solid waste collectors license pursuant to Chapter
921.
   (u)   "City" means The City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (v)   "Tenant" means any person, other than an owner, occupying or with the
right to occupy a premises by virtue of any form of tenancy recognized in Ohio.
      (Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.02  SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.
   Every person, being an owner or tenant of a premises, shall have all solid
waste accumulating on such premises properly prepared for collection by
depositing it in one or more metal or plastic, watertight containers, securely
tied and of sufficient strength to support the weight of the contents.  All
containers shall at all times, except when necessarily removed for use of such
container, be covered with a tight, closefitting lid or cover of a type
sufficient to prevent animals or insects from
having access thereto.
(Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.03  PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.
   Every person with the duty of properly preparing solid waste pursuant to
Section
919.02 shall place the properly prepared solid waste at the line of the public
street or service strip along the collection route at such times as are
scheduled by the sanitation services public utility, the residential hauler,
the commercial hauler serving the premises or the City.  No person shall place
any solid waste in the curb area prior to one hour before sunset on the day
before the scheduled collection, nor shall any person, with the responsibility
of properly preparing solid waste pursuant to Section
919.02, permit an empty container to remain at the line of the public street,
alley or service strip after sunset on the day the collection is made.
(Ord. 87-740.  Passed 12-29-87.)
 
919.04  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in the City's Codified Ordinances, every person
who is the owner or tenant of a premises shall have all solid waste, demolition
matter and dangerous substances accumulating on his premises collected and
disposed of, in accordance with the law, on at least a weekly basis; unless,
solid waste collection by the sanitation services public utility, the
residential hauler, the commercial hauler serving the premises or the City has
been delayed during the week.  No person who is an owner or tenant of a
residential premises shall permit solid waste accumulating on his residential
premises to be collected or disposed of by anyone other than a sanitation
services public utility, the residential hauler serving the premises or the
City.  No person who is an owner or tenant of a premises shall allow any solid
waste accumulating on his premises, other than residential premises, not
collected and disposed of by a sanitation services public utility or the City
to be collected and disposed of by any person other than a commercial hauler.
(Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.05  UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE.
   Except as otherwise provided in the City's Codified Ordinances, no owner or
tenant of any premises shall knowingly allow solid waste, demolition matter or
dangerous substances to accumulate in or on his premises, or upon any alley,
street or other public way adjacent to his premises, for a period in excess of
one week.  Solid waste and demolition matter accumulated from engaging in
clearing land, building, rebuilding or otherwise erecting or altering a
building or other structure shall be removed by the person or licensed building
contractor generating such solid waste, demolition matter or both; provided,
however, that an owner or tenant of a residential premises may employ a
residential hauler to remove and dispose of such solid waste and demolition
matter and that a licensed building contractor or the owner or tenant of the
premises, other than a residential premises may employ a commercial hauler to
remove and dispose of such solid waste and demolition matter.
(Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.051 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES; PROVIDED BY OWNER.
   On and after January 1, 1997, no owner of real property within the City upon
which living quarters are, or have been, maintained and in which garbage or
refuse, or both, are created shall fail to assure the collection of all such
garbage or refuse from the premises by solid waste collectors licensed by the
City pursuant to Chapters
921 and
922 of the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 96-319, passed 9-24-96; Ord. 16-83, passed 3-29-16.)
 
919.06  DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE, DEMOLITION MATTER AND DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall bury or
otherwise dispose of any solid waste by depositing it or causing it to be
deposited upon any property, public or private, other than those properties
licensed by the State as a solid waste disposal site or facility pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
 
   (b)   No person shall deposit their solid waste, demolition matter or
dangerous substances upon the property of another for any purpose, including
the purpose of having such solid waste, demolition matter or dangerous
substances collected by a residential hauler or commercial hauler, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
 
   (c)   No person shall dispose of any demolition matter by depositing it or
causing it to be deposited upon any premises other than those designated by the
City Manager as a demolition dump pursuant to Chapter
923.
 
   (d)   No person shall deposit solid waste accumulated from a private
premises, in a public litter receptacle.
 
   (e)   No person other than a sanitation services public utility, residential
hauler or the City shall collect and dispose of solid waste generated at a
residential premises in the City, except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter.
(Ord. 87-740.  Passed 12-29-87.)
 
919.07  PERMITTING VEHICLE TO STAND.
   No person shall cause or permit any vehicle containing solid waste to stand
upon any street, alley or thoroughfare, or public or private property within
the City for more than one hour, except when in actual use in receiving or
loading solid waste.
(Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.08  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall maintain, collect, receive, remove, transport, convey
or dispose of any solid waste, demolition matter or dangerous substances in
such manner or by such means to constitute a public or private nuisance, or to
constitute a source of injury or damage to the person or property of another.
 
   (b)   In the event the Board of Health determines that the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City will be threatened by the
continuance of the condition of the public nuisance described in this section,
and determines that the public nuisance must be removed immediately to prevent
injury to the life or property, or both, of the residents of the City, the
Board of Health shall cause the immediate abatement of such public nuisance at
the expense of the property owner.  The Board of Health shall conduct such
nuisance abatement actions and shall recover the costs of such nuisance
abatement actions in accordance with the provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3707.
 
   (c)   The enforcement measures contained in this section shall be in
addition to other methods of enforcing the provisions of Chapters
919,
921,
922 and
923, which the City may have.
(Ord. 87-740.  Passed 12-29-87.)
 
919.09  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to supervise, see to and provide
for the control of the keeping, collection, removal and disposal of all solid
waste, demolition matter and dangerous substances which accumulate within the
City, and to enforce or cause the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters
919,
921,
922 and
923, and any rules, regulations and orders promulgated by him pursuant
thereto.  For the purpose of carrying out the spirit and intent of Chapters
919,
921,
922 and
923, and in furtherance thereof, the City Manager is authorized and directed to
promulgate and record in his official journal such rules, regulations and
orders, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and on behalf of
the City, relating to the keeping, collection, removal and disposition of solid
waste, demolition matter and dangerous substances and the sweeping of the
streets, as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and sanitary
requirements of the public.  Such rules, regulations and orders, without
limitations on the generality thereof, may include or relate to the subject
matter of the places or points on or about premises where containers, bags or
bundles prescribed by this chapter, may be kept or placed for collection
purposes; schedules, whether daily or otherwise, for collection; types of
containers which may be utilized for keeping solid waste, demolition matter and
dangerous substances on any premises and types of vehicles and containers in
which solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous substances may be collected
and transported over the streets and public ways of the City, places and
methods of disposal of solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous substances;
the designation of solid waste dumps and the operation and maintenance
thereof.  Every such rule, regulation and order when recorded in his official
journal by the City Manager shall have the same force and effect as if
specifically set forth in Chapters
919,
921,
922 and
923.
(Ord. 90-639.  Passed 12-4-90.)
 
919.10  SUITABILITY OF SANITATION SERVICE PUBLIC UTILITY.
   Any prospective franchisee shall provide an officer's certificate to the
City certifying, under oath, and documenting any and all adjudicated or pending
actions or matters brought or filed against it or any of its affiliates or
subsidiaries by any governmental authority, whether federal, state,
administrative, local or otherwise, which involve compliance or noncompliance
with environmental rules or regulations, the violation of which did or could
result in criminal or civil penalties being assessed or settlements in excess
of five thousand dollars ($5,000), or of a criminal or civil nature filed by
such a governmental authority which involves allegations including, but not
limited to, antitrust matters, price-fixing, bid rigging, fraud or bribery,
covering a period of five years prior to the first reading of the ordinance
establishing the prospective franchisee as a sanitation services public
utility.
(Ord. 87-240.  Passsed 7-17-87.)
 
919.11  SANITARY SERVICE FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of the service charges authorized by
this chapter shall be deposited daily with the Director of Finance and shall be
accounted for and be known as the Sanitary Service Fund and when appropriated
by the City Commission, subject to the provisions of any ordinance or indenture
of mortgage authorizing issuance of any securing mortgage revenue bonds for the
sanitary service system, shall be available for the payment of the costs and
expenses of the management, maintenance and repair of the City sanitary service
system and any surplus in such fund following such payment shall be used for
the payment of the interest on bonds issued and outstanding or which may be
issued to provide funds with which to pay the City's portion of the costs of
construction of the sanitary service system, or part thereof, and to retire
such bonds when they mature, and for costs incurred in the enlargement or
replacement of the City's sanitary service system.
(Ord. 87-240.  Passed 7-17-87.)
 
919.12  NOTICES.
   Whenever the Health Commissioner determines that there has been a violation
of any provision of this chapter, except where a violation citation tag has
been issued pursuant to Section
919.13, he shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible
therefor and order compliance with this chapter as hereinafter provided.  Such
notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, refer to the section or sections of this
chapter violated and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Be served on the owner or agent in person.  However, this notice and
order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or agent if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the dwelling affected.  If a registered or certified mail
envelope is returned with an endorsement showing that service was refused, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address,
residence, or place of business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on the date of
mailing.  If the registered or certified mail envelope is returned with an
endorsement showing that services was unclaimed, the notice may be served by
ordinary mail to his last known mailing address, residence, or place of
business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing, provided that the
ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery.
      (1)   The notice and order may, in the alternative, be served by leaving
it at his last known residence or place of business in the presence of a family
member or other responsible person of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the general nature of the contents thereof.
      (2)   If service is not accomplished by any of the above means, then a
notification of the existence of the notice and order may be published at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation.
         (Ord. 90-626.  Passed 11-27-90.)
 
919.13  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS.
   The Health Commissioner is authorized and directed to provide inspectors
with citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due notice and
summons to the person responsible for violations of Sections
919.01 through
919.04 and
919.06 through
919.08 of this chapter.
   (a)   Such citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the section of the chapter violated,
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place, and it shall be made
on oath before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
   (b)   The citation tag shall be served on such person in accordance with the
provisions of Section
919.12.
   (c)   The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of appearing
at the time and place stated, he may, within that stated time, appear
personally at the office of the Clerk of Municipal Court and on signing a plea
of guilty and a waiver of trial pay a stated fine and stated costs, if any. 
The citation shall inform the defendant that he may be arrested if he fails to
appear either at the Clerk's office or at the time and place stated in the
citation.
   (d)   When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for the arrest of that person.
   (e)   When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed in accordance with Rule 5 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   The citation tag as herein provided shall be sufficient notice,
summons and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
that the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags or a legal notice of violation as provided by Section
919.12, in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
      (Ord. 90-626.  Passed 11-27-90.)
 
919.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates Sections
919.06(a) through
919.06(c) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months or both.
 
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of Sections
919.02 through
919.05,
919.06(d),
919.06(e),
919.07, or
919.08 of this chapter or any rule, regulation, or order made by the City
Manager pertaining to the enforcement of such sections shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of the sections set forth in this paragraph,
or any rule, regulation, order made by the City Manager pertaining t the
enforcement of such sections, a violation of any such section, rule,
regulation, or order is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 96-137.  Passed 4-16-96.)
 
   (c)   Whoever continues to violate Section
919.051 of this Chapter or any rule, regulation, or order made by the City
Manager pertaining to the enforcement of such section, after having been
provided with the notice required by Section
919.12, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of Section
919.051, or any rule, regulation, or order made by the City Manager pertaining
to the enforcement of that section, a violation of such section, rule,
regulation, or order is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 96-319, passed 9-24-96; Ord. 16-83, passed 3-29-16.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 921
Private Solid Waste Collectors
 
921.01   License application.
921.02   Issuance of license.
921.03   License nontransferable; term; fee.
921.04   Additional licenses.
921.05   License revocation.
921.06   License required before collection.
921.07   Regulation of private solid waste collectors.
921.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
Vehicle loads dropping or leaking - see TRAF.
339.08
Shifting loads; loose loads - see TRAF.
339.09
Littering - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Solid waste collection generally - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
919
921.01  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   The City Manager is authorized to issue private solid waste collector
licenses in such number and to such persons as he shall deem appropriate for
the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, or the economy of
the City.  Such license shall not be issued unless the person seeking the same
shall file with the City Manager an application, under oath, setting forth the
following items:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant and the location of any premises
to be used by the applicant in conjunction with the license being applied for.
   (b)   The type of vehicle to be used, which shall be equipped with either a
watertight metal tank, or one or more watertight metal vessels for containing
solid waste, either both or all of which shall be equipped with tight, close-
fitting lids or covers.  Except for removal thereof in the necessary use of
such tank or vessel, the lids or covers shall be kept in place at all times,
and none thereof, when containing any liquid substance, shall ever be filled to
an extent greater than a point six inches from the top thereof.  Vehicles used
for the hauling of rubbish only may be any type which insures against the
spilling, dropping or blowing of the contents thereof upon the streets, alleys
or public ways of the City.  All such vehicles shall be approved by the Service
Department.
   (c)   The location of premises to which solid waste collected by the
applicant or his agent or employees shall be removed and disposed of by the
applicant or his agent or employee.
   (d)   A written statement by the applicant that he will comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
      In addition, each application for a license shall be accompanied with
proof that the following items have been secured and shall remain in effect
during the term of such license:
   (e)   Comprehensive general liability insurance and comprehensive automobile
liability insurance in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) per occurrence and not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) aggregate for bodily injury and not less than twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) for property damage.  Such insurance shall be subject to
approval by the Director of Law and shall not be cancelled without ten days'
advance written notice of such cancellation having been given to the City.
   (f)   A certificate of Workers' Compensation insurance when the applicant
employs one or more employees.
   (g)   City income tax number. 
      (Ord. 82-542.  Passed 11-23-82.)
 
921.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon being satisfied that an applicant will comply with all the terms,
conditions and requirements of Chapters
919 and
921 and any rules, regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto, the City
Manager may grant a private solid waste collector's license to such applicant.
   The City shall provide the licensee with an official tag, decal or symbol
for each licensed vehicle which shall be securely fastened to the left front
door of the licensed vehicle. 
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
921.03  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; TERM; FEE.
   No private solid waste collector's license shall be transferable without the
written approval of the City Manager.  Every such license shall expire December
31 of the year in which the same was issued and, while in effect, shall be at
all times in the possession of the licensee or his agent or employees acting
thereunder.  To defray the administrative costs incident to the granting
thereof, no such license shall be issued until there shall be paid to the City
Manager an annual license fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
a license to operate a single vehicle and an additional annual license fee of
five dollars ($5.00) for each additional vehicle.  No such fee shall be
prorated.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
921.04  ADDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Only a single license shall be required of any one private solid waste
collector, regardless of the number of premises from which solid waste is to be
collected and removed pursuant to such license.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
921.05  LICENSE REVOCATION.
   In the event of the failure of any such licensee or any employee or agent of
such licensee to comply with any provision or requirement of Chapters
919,
921 and
923 or any rules, regulation or order put into effect by the City Manager, the
City Manager is empowered to revoke the license of such licensee forthwith. 
The giving of notice of such effect by mail and addressed to such licensee at
the address specified in the application for license shall be sufficient to
accomplish such revocation.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
921.06  LICENSE REQUIRED BEFORE COLLECTION.
   No person except when being an agent, employee or solid waste collection
contractor of or with the City, or the agent or employee of such contractor, or
when being the owner of premises on which such solid waste has accumulated or
has been created, shall collect, receive or remove any solid waste from any
premises or transport, carry, cart or convey any solid waste over or upon any
street, alley or highway, without having obtained a private solid waste
collector's license in the manner prescribed in this chapter; provided,
however, no person possessing a license issued pursuant to Chapter
922 shall be required to also obtain a license issued pursuant to this chapter
for purposes of collecting, transporting and disposing of solid waste generated
at a residential premises.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-17-87.)
 
921.07  REGULATION OF PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall transport solid waste, other than recyclable materials
being trasnported to a recycling center, over the streets or other public ways
in the City unless the solid waste is contained in a leak-proof vehicle
licensed pursuant to this part.  All vehicles used by private solid waste
collectors shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance and
insect breeding and shall be maintained in safe condition and repair.
 
   (b)   No person owning or having control of a vehicle used for transporting
solid waste shall cause any of the solid waste being transported to be dumped,
fall or to be scattered on any public way or in any place other than a premises
licensed by the State as a solid waste disposal site or facility pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.  The person having control of a vehicle shall
immediately clean up any solid waste which has been discharged from his vehicle
onto any place other than a premises licensed by the State as a solid  waste
disposal site or facility pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3734.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-17-87.)
 
   (c)   No private solid waste collector shall engage in the business of a
private solid waste collector by the curbside collection of solid waste or
transportation of such solid waste so collected from or over the street or
other public ways in the City at anytime prior to 6:00 a.m., nor after 8 p.m.
of any day.  No such private solid waste collector shall engage in the curbside
collection of solid waste except pursuant to the daily collection schedule as
it may be, from time to time, established by the City Manager pursuant to
Section
919.09.
(Ord. 01-410.  Passed 12-11-01.)
 
921.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or
order made or effectuated by the City Manager pertaining to the maintenance,
collection, removal or disposal of solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous
substances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment not
exceeding sixty days, or both.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 922
Residential Solid Waste Collectors
 
922.01   License application.
922.02   Issuance of license.
922.03   License nontransferable; term; fee.
922.04   Contracts with service areas.
922.05   License revocation.
922.06   License required before collection.
922.07   Regulation of residential solid waste collectors.
922.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
Vehicle loads dropping or leaking - see TRAF.
339.08
Shifting loads; loose loads - see TRAF.
339.09
Littering - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Private refuse collectors - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
921
Solid waste disposal regulations - see OAC Ch. 3745-27
922.01  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   The City Manager is authorized to issue residential solid collectors'
licenses in such manner and to such persons as he shall deem appropriate for
the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, or the economy of
the City.  Such license shall authorize the holder thereof to collect solid
waste, subject to the requirements of Chapter
919, on the day of the week specified in the license.  Such license shall not
be issued unless the person seeking the same shall file with the City Manager
an application, under oath, setting forth the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and the location of any
premises to be used by the applicant in conjunction with the license being
applied for.
      (2)   The type of vehicle to be used, which shall be equipped with either
a watertight metal tank, or one or more watertight metal vessels for containing
solid waste, either both or all of which shall be equipped with tight, close-
fitting lides or covers.  Except for removal thereof in the necessary use of
such tank or vessel, the lids or covers shall be kept in place at all times,
and none thereof, when containing any liquid substance, shall ever be filled to
an extent greater than a point six inches from the top thereof.
         Vehicles used for the hauling of rubbish only may be any type which
insures against the spilling, dropping or blowing of the contents thereof upon
the streets, alleys or public ways of the City.  All such vehicles shall be
approved by the Health Division.
      (3)   The location of premises to which solid waste collected by the
applicant or his agent or employees shall be removed and disposed of by the
applicant or his agent or employee.
      (4)   The day of the week, Monday through Friday, on which the applicant
wishes to operate.
      (5)   A written statement by the applicant that he will comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
 
   (b)   In addition, each application for a license shall be accompanied with
proof that the following items have been secured and shall remain in effect
during the term of such license:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance and comprehensive
automobile liability insurance in an amount of not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) per occurrence and not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000) aggregate for bodily injury and not less than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000) for property damage.  The insurance
shall be subject to approval by the Director of Law and shall not be cancelled
without ten days advance written notice of such cancellation having been given
to the City.
      (2)   A certificate of Worker's Compensation insurance when the applicant
employs one or more employees.
      (3)   City income tax number.
   An applicant may apply for one or more residential solid waste collector's
licenses for the purpose of collecting solid waste during one or more days of
the week.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon being satisfied that an applicant will comply with all the terms,
conditions and requirements of Chapters
919 and
922 and any rules, regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto, the City
Manager, may grant a private solid waste collector's license to such applicant
to collect solid waste generated only at a residential premises, such
collection to be performed only during the day of the week, Monday through
Firday, specified in the license.
   The City Manager may divide the City into two or more districts and allow
the collection of solid waste by licensed residential solid waste collectors
within a district on only one day of the week.
   The City shall provide the licensee with an official tag, decal or symbol
for each licensed vehicle which shall be securely fastened to the left front
door of the licensed vehicle.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.03  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; TERM; FEE.
   No residential solid waste collector's license shall be transferable without
the written approval of the City Manager.  Every such license shall expire
December 31 of the year in which the same was issued and, while in effect,
shall be at all times in the possession of the licensee or his agent or
employees acting thereunder.  To defray the administrative costs incident to
the granting thereof, no such license shall be issued until there shall be paid
to the City an annual license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
day of the week authorized by the license issued to a maximum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for authority to operate four or five days per week by a
license or licenses to operate a single vehicle and an additional annual
license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional vehicle.  No such fee
shall be pro-rated; provided, however, during 1987 the initial vehicle license
fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day of the week authorized by the
license issued to a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for authority to
operate four or five days per week.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.04  CONTRACTS WITH SERVICE AREAS.
   No licensed residential solid waste collector shall enter into a contract
with any person for the collection of solid waste generated at a residential
premises which contract is not cancelable upon thirty days notice without
penalty to the contracting parties.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.05  LICENSE REVOCATION.
   In the event of the failure of any such licensee or any employee or agent of
such licensee to comply with any provision or requirement of Chapters
919,
922, and
923, or any rule, regulation or order put into effect by the City Manager, the
City Manager is empowered to revoke the license of such licensee forthwith. 
The giving of notice of such effect by mail and addressed to such licensee at
the address specified in the application for license shall be sufficient to
accomplish such revocation.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.06  LICENSE REQUIRED BEFORE COLLECTION.
   No person except when being an agent, employee or solid waste collection
contractor of or with the City, or the agent or employee of such contractor,
shall collect, receive or remove any solid waste from any residential premises
or transport, carry, cart or convey any solid waste, generated at a residential
premises, over or upon any street, alley or highway, without having obtained a
residential solid waste collector's license in the manner prescribed in this
chapter.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
922.07  REGULATION OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall transport solid waste, other than recyclable materials
being transported to a recycling center, over the street or other public ways
in the City unless the solid waste is contained in a leak-proof vehicle
licensed pursuant to this part.  All vehicles used by residential solid waste
collectors shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance and
insect breeding and shall be maintained in safe condition and repair.
 
   (b)   No person owning or having control of a vehicle used for transporting
solid waste shall cause any of the solid waste being transported to be dumped,
fall or to be scattered on any public way or in any place other than a premises
licensed by the State as a solid waste disposal site or facility pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
(Ord. 87-421.  Passed 7-7-87.)
 
   (c)   No residential solid waste collector shall engage in the business of a
residential solid waste collector by the curbside collection of solid waste or
transportation of such solid waste so collected from or over the street or
other public ways in the City at anytime prior to 6:00 a.m., nor after 8 p.m.
of any day.  No such residential solid waste collector shall engage in the
curbside collection of solid waste except pursuant to the daily collection
schedule as it may be, from time to time, established by the City Manager
pursuant to Section
919.09.
(Ord. 01-410.  Passed 12-11-01.)
 
922.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or
order made or effectuated by the City Manager pertaining to the maintenance,
collection, removal or disposal of solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous
substances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding sixty days, or both.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 923
Demolition Dumps
923.01   Application.
923.02   Determination on application.
923.03   Designation of dump.
923.04   Yearly designation.
923.05   Withdrawal of designation.
923.06   Fee.
923.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Establishing dumping grounds - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
Solid and hazardous wastes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3734
923.01  APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to have any premises designated as a demolition dump
shall first file with the City Manager an application upon a form to be
furnished and approved by the City Manager.  The application shall contain
information necessary to describe and locate the premises to be designated as a
demolition dump together with such other information which the City Manager may
require.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.02  DETERMINATION ON APPLICATION.
   The City Manager upon receipt of an application, shall cause an inspection
of the premises described in the application to be made.  Before any premises
are designated as a demolition dump, the City Manager shall make a
determination:
   (a)   That the premises are suitable and adequate for the purpose of the
disposal of demolition matter in a healthful, safe and sanitary manner;
   (b)   That such premises contain "fillable" land between the grand line
established in accordance with adjacent property and the natural terrain of the
subject property;
   (c)   That the terrain of the subject property is such that adequate means
and methods of regulating the deposit of demolition matter can be established
and maintained; and
   (d)   That the applicant has complied with all applicable City ordinances
and regulations.
      (Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.03  DESIGNATION OF DUMP.
   Upon making a determination that all applicable rules, regulations,
requirements and conditions have been met, the City Manager shall designate the
premises as a demolition dump.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.04  YEARLY DESIGNATION.
   The designation of any premises as a demolition dump shall be for a period
of one year.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.05  WITHDRAWAL OF DESIGNATION.
   If upon the inspection of a demolition dump, it is determined that the
rules, regulations, requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter
have not been met or complied with, the City Manager shall withdraw his
designation of the premises as a demolition dump.  The City Manager shall
notify the applicant of such action and thereafter no person shall deposit or
permit the depositing of demolition matter upon such premises.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.06  FEE.
   No premises shall be designated as a demolition dump by the City Manager
until the applicant for such designation makes payment of a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to the City.  No such fee shall be prorated.
(Ord. 81-464.  Passed 11-3-81.)
 
923.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or
order made or effectuated by the City Manager pertaining to the maintenance,
collection, removal or disposal of solid waste, demolition matter and dangerous
substances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding sixty days, or both.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 925
Collection and Disposal of Storm Waters
925.01   Storm water in sanitary sewer declared a nuisance.
925.02   Storm waters in sanitary sewers prohibited.
925.03   Existing conditions discontinued.
925.04   Inspection of premises.
925.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Sanitary sewer defined - see S.U. & P.S. 916.01
Storm sewer defined - see S.U. & P.S. 916.01
Discharge of storm water into public sewers - see S.U. & P.S. 916.02
Establishment and use of Sewer Fund - see S.U. & P.S.
917.06
Storm drain conductors and leaders - see OAC Ch. 4101:2-51-69
925.01  STORM WATER IN SANITARY SEWER DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   The collection, depositing or placing of storm waters or accumulated surface
waters in any sewer in the City sewage system which is, has or may be designed
solely for the purpose of a sanitary sewer, is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 53-130.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
925.02  STORM WATERS IN SANITARY SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall collect or deposit or cause to be collected or deposited,
any storm waters or accumulated surface waters in any public sanitary sewerage
system of the City.  However, it may be permissible to do so in certain cases
where the sanitary and storm sewerage systems are combined into one sewerage
system, and where, in the opinion of the City Manager, the design of the sewer
is such that there is no imminent danger of flooding basements which have
connections into the combined sewer.
   For the purpose of determining when any violation of this section occurs,
such violation shall be deemed to occur either in the premises from which such
storm or surface waters are collected and deposited into such sewerage system
or at the point where such storm water entered the City sewerage system within
the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 67-177.  Passed 8-21-67.)
 
925.03  EXISTING CONDITIONS DISCONTINUED.
   In all cases where the storm sewerage system and a sanitary sewerage system
are separate or the combined sewer is not adequate, the owner of any premises
from which the storm or surface waters are collected and channeled and caused
by the construction of any building or yard therein, to be deposited in the
sanitary or combined sewerage system shall take such measures as are necessary
to disconnect such storm or surface water drainage from such sewerage system
within sixty days after notice that such storm or surface water is, or has been
draining into such sewer and creating a nuisance detrimental to the public
health and welfare.  Such notice shall be served by the City Manager or by his
deputy appointed for such purpose, upon the owner of the premises personally or
by registered mail.
(Ord. 67-177.  Passed 8-21-67.)
 
925.04  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause an inspection to be made of
any premises when he has reasonable ground to believe that a violation of
Section
925.01 through
925.03 is being committed.  The inspection herein provided for shall be limited
solely to the steps necessary to determine whether or not a violation of such
section exists.
(Ord. 53-130.  Passed 8-3-53.)
 
925.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 927
Utilities Serving New Condominium Developments
927.01   Application.
927.02   Water and sanitary sewer taps prohibited.
927.03   Procedure preliminary to development of a new condominium development.
927.04   Condominium municipal utility contract and utility infrastructure
construction.
927.05   City Engineer's acceptance of utility infrastructure.
927.01  APPLICATION.
   (a)   This Chapter shall apply to Condominium Developments on land located
within the corporate boundaries of the City and first submitted to the
provisions of Chapter 5311 of the Ohio Revised Code by the execution and filing
for record of a declaration pursuant to Section 5311.05 of the Ohio Revised
Code for such land subsequent to January 1,1997.
 
   (b)   The term "Condominium Development," as used in the Codified
Ordinances, shall have the same meaning as the term "condominium development"
defined in Section 5311.01 of The Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (c)   The term "New Condominium Development" means a Condominium Development
which is subject to this Chapter.
(Ord. 97-148.  Passed 4-29-97.)
 
927.02  WATER AND SANITARY SEWER TAPS PROHIBITED.
   No permit to tap a City water main or a City sanitary sewer line to connect
a New Condominium Development to the City's water and/or sewer utilities shall
be issued until after the owner of the New Condominium Development has entered
into a Condominium Municipal Utility Contract with the City pursuant to Section
927.04 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 97-148.  Passed 4-29-97.)
 
927.03  PROCEDURE PRELIMINARY TO DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT.
   When the owner of a tract of land wishes to develop a New Condominium
Development thereon, such owner shall submit to the City Engineer for his
review a water and sanitary sewer utility plan for the use and development of
such tract of land.  The City Engineer shall investigate and ascertain whether
the water and sanitary sewer utility plan complies with the following
conditions:
   (a)   The water and sanitary sewer utility plan shall provide for the
installation of water lines, sanitary sewer lines and necessary related
appurtenances, as determined by the City Engineer, in accordance with
construction specifications established in Chapter
931 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The water and sanitary sewer utility plan shall include an accurate 
centerline survey for all water and sanitary sewer lines to be installed within
the New Condominium Development.  The water and sanitary sewer utility plan
shall include extending all water lines and sanitary sewer lines within the New
Condominium Development to the property lines of the development as the City
Engineer shall determine is necessary so that municipal utility services can be
provided to areas beyond the boundary of the New Condominium Development in the
future.
   (c)   The owner of the New Condominium Development shall submit along with
the water and sanitary sewer utility plan a deed document conveying to The City
of Springfield, Ohio a forty foot (40') wide easement, extending Twenty feet
(20') on each side of the surveyed center line of the water lines and sanitary
sewer lines described in the water and sanitary sewer utility plan, and
conveying to The City of Springfield, Ohio good title in the water and sanitary
sewer infrastructure which the City will operate and maintain upon acceptance
of dedication thereof.  The owner may request that the City Engineer permit a
narrower easement in the event appurtenances (such as, by way of example, water
meters or water shutoffs) will not be extended from both sides of a line or in
the event a forty foot (40') width is not possible. The said deed document
shall convey the easement and utility infrastructure to the City at no cost to
the City, shall be in a form approved by the Law Director and shall warrant
that the easement is free and clear of all encumbrances.  Neither receipt of a
water and sanitary sewer utility plan with an executed easement document
included therewith nor approval of the water and sanitary sewer utility plan by
the City Engineer shall constitute accepting dedication of the easement
described in the easement document by the City.
      (Ord. 97-148.  Passed 4-29-97.)
 
927.04  CONDOMINIUM MUNICIPAL UTILITY CONTRACT AND UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE
CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   The City Engineer shall examine and investigate each New Condominium
Development water and sanitary sewer utility plan submitted to him and within
Thirty days (30) of receiving such plan shall either approve the plan or advise
the owner of the proposed New Condominium Development of any deficiencies the
City Engineer finds in the water and sanitary sewer utility plan.  If the City
Engineer determines that there are deficiencies in a water and sanitary sewer
utility plan, the owner of the proposed New Condominium Development may
thereafter submit a corrected water and sanitary sewer utility plan for
consideration of the City Engineer.
 
   (b)   If the City Engineer determines that a submitted New Condominium
Development water and sanitary sewer utility plan is acceptable, he shall so
inform the Law Director who shall prepare and tender to the  owner of the New
Condominium Development a Condominium Municipal Utility Contract that shall
include the following covenants:
      (1)   That the owner shall construct the water and sanitary sewer utility
infrastructure on the lands included in the New Condominium Development in
strict compliance with the approved New Condominium Development water and
sanitary sewer utility plan;
      (2)   That the owner shall convey the easement and utility
infrastructure, described in the approved New Condominium Development water and
sanitary sewer utility plan, to the City, at no cost to the City, by means of a
deed document which shall be in a form approved by the Law Director and shall
warrant that the easement is free and clear of all encumbrances;
      (3)   That the City shall accept dedication of such easement and record
such easement after the City Engineer has requested acceptance of the easement
and the water and sanitary sewer infrastructure described in the deed document
pursuant to Section
927.05 of this Chapter;
      (4)   That the owner shall pay in advance to the City the inspection fees
imposed under Subsection
1211.04(c)(3) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (5)   That customers connected to the water and sanitary sewer utility
infrastructure constructed in accordance with the Condominium Municipal Utility
Contract may receive water and/or sewer services in accordance with the
Codified Ordinances and the rules and regulations adopted by the City governing
the provision of municipal water and sanitary sewer utility services; and
      (6)   Such other terms and conditions as the Law Director may determine
are necessary to protect the interests of the City.
 
   (c)   The City Manager is authorized to enter into Condominium Municipal
Utility Contracts with owners of New Condominium Developments; provided, that
no such contract requiring and expenditure on the part of the City in excess of
the expenditure limit established in
Section 42 of the Charter shall be entered into without first receiving the
approval of the City Commission .
 
   (d)   After the owner has entered in to Condominium Municipal Utility
Contract with the City, the owner of the New Condominium Development may
petition the City Engineer for permission to deviate form the plan.  The City
Engineer may permit plan deviations which are not in conflict with other
provisions of the Codified Ordinances, which are not in conflict with the
construction specifications established in Chapter
931 of the Codified Ordinances and which do not prevent the City from extending
municipal utility services to customers beyond the boundary of the New
Condominium Development without obtaining additional real property rights in
the New Condominium Development lands.
(Ord. 97-148.  Passed 4-29-97.)
 
927.05  CITY ENGINEER'S ACCEPTANCE OF UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE.
   After the water and sanitary sewer infrastructure has been constructed
within the New Condominium Development, the owner of the New Condominium
Development shall prepare and deliver to the City Engineer as-built drawings
for the said water and sanitary sewer infrastructure and a deed of easement as
approved in the Section
927.03 procedure, with necessary changes made due to approved plan deviations
allowed by the City Engineer.  If the City Engineer determines that the said
water and sanitary sewer infrastructure has been constructed in compliance with
the approved New Condominium Development water and sanitary sewer utility plan,
the City Engineer shall certify his acceptance of the said water and sanitary
sewer infrastructure to the City Commission and request acceptance of
dedication of the easement and the water and sanitary sewer infrastructure
described in the deed of easement.  The City shall assume operation and
maintenance responsibilities for the water and sanitary sewer infrastructure
only:
   (a)   upon acceptance of dedication of the easement and water and sanitary
sewer described in the deed of easement,
   (b)   upon the deed of easement being recorded, and
   (c)   upon the City receiving from the owner's attorney his certification
that the said easement is free and clear of all encumbrances and that all
mechanic's liens which could attach to the easement and the water and sanitary
sewer infrastructure located in the easement have been waived.
      (Ord. 97-148.  Passed 4-29-97.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 929
Wellhead and Well Field Protection Regulations
929.01   Purpose and scope of chapter.
929.02   Definitions.
929.03   Designation of wellhead protection areas.
929.04   Primary area regulations.
929.05   Secondary area regulations.
929.06   Additional hazardous activities prohibited.
929.07   Reporting requirements.
929.08   Nuisance determination; prohibition.
929.09   Notice and abatement.
929.10   Emergency abatement.
929.11   Abatement of nuisance by the health commissioner.
929.12   Notices.
929.13   Violation citation tags.
929.14   Appeal to City Manager.
929.15   Backflow prevention.
929.16   Secondary containment and release mitigation.
929.17   Variances.
929.99   Penalties.
 
929.01  PURPOSE  AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the City’s powers
conferred under Section 3750.11 of the Ohio Revised Code to provide for the
protection of the City’s ground water resources that serve as a source of
drinking water for the City’s public water system and that are located within
the scientifically derived wellhead protection areas established by the City.
 
   (b)   The regulations adopted in this Chapter are adopted for the purpose of
safeguarding the public health, safety and welfare of the community, the
health, safety and welfare of the City’s water customers and to protect the
community's potable water supply against contamination from existing and future
potential pollution sources by regulating nuisances and the storage, handling,
use and/or production of those substances which could pose a threat to the
City’s wellheads and well field located along the Mad River in the Township of
German, County of Clark, State of Ohio.
 
   (c)   Nothing in this Chapter should be construed to apply the provisions of
this Chapter to facilities owned or operated by the City or to any of the
City’s operations.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.  When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number.  All capitalized terms used in the
definition of any other term shall have their meaning as defined in this
Section
929.02. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   (a)   “Aboveground Storage Tank” means any one or combination of tanks
(including aboveground pipes connected thereto) which is used to contain an
accumulation of regulated substances and the volume of which (including the
volume of underground pipes connected thereto) is less than ten (10) percent
beneath the surface of the ground.  Flow--through process tanks regulated by
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or by the Ohio Fire Marshal are
excluded from the definition of aboveground storage tank.
   (b)   “Agricultural Chemicals” means pesticides and fertilizers.
   (c)   “Aquifer” means a porous, water-bearing geologic formation composed of
materials capable of yielding significant quantities of water.
   (d)   "Best management practices" means activities, prohibitions or
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of Ohio.  Best management practices also include
treatment, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage
or leaks [ie. releases], sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
   (e)   “Certified Applicator” means any person certified to apply pesticides
by Ohio’s Director of Agriculture.
   (f)   "Chapter" or ''this Chapter" means this Chapter
929 of the Codified Ordinances of the City, as amended from time to time, and
any Regulations adopted hereunder.
   (g)   "City" means The City of Springfield, Ohio, or, as appropriate in the
case of specific provisions of this Chapter, any board, bureau, authority,
agency, commission, department, or any other entity of or acting on behalf of
The City of Springfield, Ohio or any officer, official, employee.
representative or agent thereof the designee of any of the foregoing, or any
successor thereto.
   (h)   “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City.
   (i)   "Commission" means the City Commission of the City.
   (j)   “Service Director” means the Director of Service Department of the
City.
   (k)   “Health Commissioner” means the Health Commissioner of the Clark
County Combined Health District.
   (l)   “Injection well” means a well into which fluids are or can be
injected, as further described in Ohio Administrative Code Section 3745-34-04;
provided that the term injection well shall not apply to the following;
      (1)   Air conditioning return flow wells used to return to the supply
aquifer the water used for heating or cooling in a heat pump when there is no
potential for the water used for heating and cooling to be contaminated with a
regulated substance,
      (2)   Cooling water return flow wells used to inject water previously
used for cooling when there is no potential for the water used for cooling to
be contaminated with a regulated substance,
      (3)   Drainage wells used to drain primarily storm runoff, into a
subsurface formation, and
      (4)   Recharge wells used to replenish the water in an aquifer.
   (m)    “ISO-Travel Time Contour” means a locus of points from which water
takes an equal amount of time to reach a given destination such as a well or
well field.
   (n)   “MSDS sheet” means a material safety data sheet prepared in compliance
with 29 CFR 1910.1200 and written in English.
   (o)   "Person" means any natural person or any association, firm,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, joint venture, corporation or
other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
   (p)   "Pesticide" means any substance or mixture of substances intended for
either of the following:
      (1)   Preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest;
      (2)   Use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant.
   (q)   “Potable Water” means water that is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary and domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.
   (r)   “Protected Public Water Supply” means a public water system which
services at least fifteen (15) service connections used by year-round residents
or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) year-round residents, and having
a time-of-travel area(s) defined through appropriate hydrologic studies.
   (s)   "Public nuisance" means any building, structure, excavation, basement,
cellar, well, cistern, storage area or any part thereof, or any item of
personal property or any activity located in the Primary or Secondary Areas
which creates or poses a danger to the City’s wellheads and/or well fields.
   (t)   "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two check valves.  During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure.  In
case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure.  The unit must include
tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   (u)   “Regulated Substances” means chemicals and mixtures of chemicals which
are health hazards.  Materials packaged for personal or household use as food
or drink for man or other animals are not regulated substances.  Regulated
substances include:
      (1)   Chemicals for which there is scientific evidence that acute or
chronic health effects may result from exposure including carcinogens, toxic
and highly toxic agents, reproductive toxins, irritants, corrosives,
sensitizers, hepatotoxins, nephrotoxins, neurotoxins, agents which act on the
hematopoietic system, and agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous
membranes.
      (2)   Mixtures of chemicals which have been tested as a whole and have
been determined to be a health hazard.
      (3)   Mixtures of chemicals which have not been tested as a whole but
which contain any chemical which has been determined to be a health hazard and
which comprises one (1.0) percent or greater of the composition on a weight per
unit weight basis, and mixtures of chemicals which include a carcinogen if the
concentration of the carcinogen in the mixture is one tenth of one (0.1)
percent or greater of the composition on a weight per unit weight basis.
      (4)   Ingredients of mixtures prepared within the Primary or Secondary
Areas in cases where such ingredients are health hazards but comprise less than
one tenth of one (0.1) percent of the mixture on a weight per unit weight basis
if carcinogenic or less than one (1.0) percent of the mixture on a weight per
unit weight basis if non- carcinogenic.
      (5)   Petroleum, petroleum-based products and non-solid petroleum
derivatives (except non-polychlorinated biphenyl dielectric fluids).
      (6)   Antifreeze, transmission fluids, brake fluids and coolants.
      (7)   Solvents (raw or spent), including cleaning solvents, degreasing
solvents, stripping compounds, dry cleaning solvents, painting solvents, and/or
hydrocarbon of halogenated hydorcarbon solvents.
      (8)   Inks, printing and photocopying chemicals and waste rags used for
solvent-based cleaning.
      (9)   Organic pigments.
      (10)   Liquid storage batteries.
      (11)   Non-aerosol, non-latex based paints, primers, thinners, dyes,
stains, wood preservatives, varnishing and cleaning compounds, paint sludges
and paint filters.
      (12)   Corrosion and rust prevention solutions.
      (13)   Industrial and commercial cleaning supplies, including drain
cleaners.
      (14)   Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides and algicides.
      (15)   Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.
      (16)   Acids and bases with a pH less than or equal to 2 or greater than
or equal to 12.5.
      (17)   Aqueous metals.
      (18)   Substances listed in the following regulations:
         (A)   40 CFR Part 355, Appendix A [List of Extremely Hazardous
Substances]
         (B)   40 CFR Part 302, Table 302.4 [List of Hazardous Substances and
Reportable Quantities for Releases]
         (C)   40 CFR Part 372, Subpart D [Toxic Chemical Listing]
         (D)   Ohio Administrative Code Section 3745-100-10.
   (v)   "Release" means any spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging,
escaping, leaching, or disposing from a tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance, in an amount of five (5) gallons or
of fifty (50) pounds or more into ground water, surface water or subsurface
soils or otherwise into the environment.
   (w)   “Underground Storage Tank” means any one or combination of tanks
(including underground pipes connected thereto) which is used to contain an
accumulation of regulated substances and the volume of which (including the
volume of underground pipes connected thereto) is ten (10) percent or more
beneath the surface of the ground.  Flow--through process tanks regulated by
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or by the Ohio Fire Marshal and septic
tanks approved by the Clark County Combined Health District, as applicable, are
excluded from the definition of underground storage tank.
   (x)   “Well Field” means a tract of land that contains a number of wells for
supplying potable water used for human or animal consumption.
   (y)   “Zone of Influence” means a zone delineated by ISO-travel time
contours around well fields.  The zone is calculated, based on the rate of
movement of groundwater in the vicinity of wells.
      (Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.03  DESIGNATION OF WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREAS.
   (a)   A One-Year Time of Travel Wellhead Protection Area, sometimes
hereinafter called the “Primary Area,” is hereby designated consisting of all
lands within the one-year time of travel zone of influence for the City’s
wellheads, bounded and described as follows:
 
Situate in the State of Ohio, County of Clark and lying within the Townships of
German and Moorefield and the City of Springfield and being part of Sections 2
and 3, Town 4, Range 10 and Sections 32 and 33, Town 5, Range 10, B.M.R.S. and
being further described as follows;
Beginning at a point on the north line of said Section 2, said point bears N
8942’26” E, 508.13 feet from the northwest corner of said section 2;
thence N 1253’43” E, 322.22 feet to a point;  thence N 2634’56” E, 435.83 feet
to a point;
thence N 3514’17” E, 450.69 feet to a point;  thence N 4823’17” E, 521.70 feet
to a point;
thence N 6127’01” E, 530.21 feet to a point;  thence N 6707’30” E, 652.79 feet
to a point;
thence N 7254’34” E, 545.34 feet to a point;  thence N 7917’41” E, 503.28 feet
to a point;
thence N 8618’41” E, 415.19 feet to a point;  thence N 8827’11” E, 494.71 feet
to a point;
thence S 8350’04” E, 497.40 feet to a point;  thence S 7740’12” E, 437.80 feet
to a point;
thence S 7403’58” E, 389.19 feet to a point;  thence S 7012’54” E, 355.10 feet
to a point;
thence S 6143’02” E, 394.61 feet to a point;  thence S 5208’46” E, 304.69 feet
to a point;
thence S 4614’26” E, 444.13 feet to a point;  thence S 3551’30” E, 296.62 feet
to a point;
thence S 2837’43” E, 334.74 feet to a point;  thence S 2009’01” E, 426.79 feet
to a point;
thence S 1445’15” E, 262.41 feet to a point;  thence S 1146’37” E, 327.42 feet
to a point;
thence S 1232’17” E, 246.27 feet to a point;  thence S 1119’06” E, 204.30 feet
to a point;
thence S 2238’07” E, 173.64 feet to a point;  thence S 3653’27” E, 200.39 feet
to a point;
thence S 5121’41” E, 171.11 feet to a point;  thence S 5800’51” E, 252.13 feet
to a point;
thence S 4200’31” E, 179.74 feet to a point;  thence S 3126’56” E, 281.79 feet
to a point;
thence S 0928’10” E, 243.72 feet to a point;  thence S 0424’07” W, 174.13 feet
to a point;
thence S 3229’27” W, 174.17 feet to a point;  thence S 4718’44” W, 236.38 feet
to a point;
thence S 5717’04” W, 222.40 feet to a point;  thence S 6143’02” W, 197.31 feet
to a point;
thence S 7134’41” W, 253.57 feet to a point;  thence S 8152’33” W, 189.01 feet
to a point;
thence S 8317’43” W, 228.78 feet to a point;  thence S 8339’52” W, 242.06 feet
to a point;
thence S 8102’02” W, 257.09 feet to a point;  thence S 7403’58” W, 194.59 feet
to a point;
thence S 6812’49” W, 71.97 feet to a point;  thence S 6649’02” W, 305.33 feet
to a point;
thence S 5732’54” W, 174.23 feet to a point;  thence S 5309’03” W, 334.05 feet
to a point;
thence S 4730’40” W, 217.50 feet to a point;  thence S 3514’17” W, 277.98 feet
to a point;
thence S 3216’37” W, 158.76 feet to a point;  thence S 4134’27” W, 164.84 feet
to a point;
thence S 4251’38” W, 210.29 feet to a point;  thence S 5019’20” W, 193.15 feet
to a point;
thence S 5413’02” W, 210.90 feet to a point;  thence S 6137’30” W, 235.90 feet
to a point;
thence S 6742’32” W, 236.45 feet to a point;  thence S 7244’47” W, 217.34 feet
to a point;
thence S 7823’49” W, 209.02 feet to a point;  thence S 8807’37” W, 207.00 feet
to a point;
thence S 8856’24” W, 136.65 feet to a point;  thence N 8805’32” W, 151.89 feet
to a point;
thence N 8017’38” W, 284.93 feet to a point;  thence N 7225’57” W, 268.05 feet
to a point;
thence N 6457’56” W, 256.91 feet to a point;  thence N 5903’19” W, 132.75 feet
to a point;
thence N 5837’44” W, 174.84 feet to a point;  thence N 4823’17” W, 243.66 feet
to a point;
thence N 4750’13” W, 109.23 feet to a point;  thence N 4319’13” W, 180.71 feet
to a point;
thence N 3444’57” W, 270.78 feet to a point;  thence N 2856’13” W, 138.03 feet
to a point;
thence N 2710’02” W, 227.56 feet to a point;  thence N 2716’23” W, 192.73 feet
to a point;
thence N 3302’37” W, 123.85 feet to a point;  thence N 3342’36” W, 112.33 feet
to a point;
thence N 4018’49” W, 313.16 feet to a point;  thence N 4056’09” W, 309.22 feet
to a point;
thence N 3629’24” W, 148.51 feet to a point;  thence N 3436’45” W, 182.91 feet
to a point;
thence N 2656’43” W, 366.86 feet to a point;  thence N 2148’59” W, 251.62 feet
to a point;
thence N 1543’12” W, 345.14 feet to a point;  thence N 0718’16” W, 182.24 feet
to a point;
thence N 0413’02” W, 617.53 feet to a point;  thence N 0247’41” W, 133.05 feet
to a point;
thence N 0108’48” E, 162.10 feet to a point;  thence N 0251’52” E, 129.82 feet
to a point;
thence N 1108’40” E, 163.47 feet to the place of beginning; containing 892.520
acres, more or less.
 
   (b)   A Five-Year Time of Travel Wellhead Protection Area, sometimes
hereinafter called the “Secondary Area,” is hereby designated consisting of all
lands within the five-year time of travel zone of influence for the City’s
wellheads, bounded and described as follows:
 
Situate in the State of Ohio, County of Clark and lying within the Townships of
German and Moorefield and the City of Springfield and being part of Sections 1,
2, 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10, Town 4, Range 10 and Sections 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33 and
34, Town 5, Range 10, B.M.R.S. and being further described as follows:
 
Beginning at a point on the north line of said Section 8, said point bears N
8942’57” W, 225.54 feet from the northeast corner of said section 8;
thence N 0506’54” E, 214.73 feet to a point;  thence N 0048’27” W, 209.87 feet
to a point;
thence N 0126’48” W, 271.97 feet to a point;  thence N 0431’03” W, 311.83 feet
to a point;
thence N 0458’24” W, 377.73 feet to a point;  thence N 0654’59” W, 271.94 feet
to a point;
thence N 1102’57” W, 341.74 feet to a point;  thence N 1402’47” W, 269.85 feet
to a point;
thence N 1523’14” W, 339.39 feet to a point;  thence N 1630’58” W, 230.38 feet
to a point;
thence N 1938’17” W, 343.26 feet to a point;  thence N 2238’07” W, 319.08 feet
to a point;
thence N 2358’43” W, 322.32 feet to a point;  thence N 4112’27” W, 86.99 feet
to a point;
thence N 3245’17” W, 136.18 feet to a point;  thence N 2513’05” W, 153.72 feet
to a point;
thence N 1437’53” W, 194.46 feet to a point;  thence N 0243’42” W, 171.99 feet
to a point;
thence N 1007’56” E, 232.69 feet to a point;  thence N 2148’59” E, 220.29 feet
to a point;
thence N 3810’42” E, 291.39 feet to a point;  thence N 5511’45” E, 229.32 feet
to a point;
thence N 6812’49” E, 220.41 feet to a point;  thence N 6941’28” E, 235.70 feet
to a point;
thence N 6327’08” E, 329.46 feet to a point;  thence N 5852’49” E, 459.03 feet
to a point;
thence N 5122’04” E, 293.45 feet to a point;  thence N 5538’24” E, 376.86 feet
to a point;
thence N 6057’50” E, 252.82 feet to a point;  thence N 6623’11” E, 285.92 feet
to a point;
thence N 7055’12” E, 225.23 feet to a point;  thence N 7254’34” E, 222.69 feet
to a point;
thence N 7841’54” E, 250.46 feet to a point;  thence N 7942’10” E, 183.06 feet
to a point;
thence N 8525’45” E, 307.97 feet to a point;  thence S 8805’32” E, 245.74 feet
to a point;
thence S 8704’00” E, 319.70 feet to a point;  thence S 7923’18” E, 399.80 feet
to a point;
thence S 7229’13” E, 326.22 feet to a point;  thence S 6707’30” E, 399.85 feet
to a point;
thence S 6039’39” E, 300.53 feet to a point;  thence S 5835’23” E, 345.33 feet
to a point;
thence S 6016’26” E, 263.97 feet to a point;  thence S 6758’44” E, 370.90 feet
to a point;
thence S 7157’08” E, 396.08 feet to a point;  thence S 8016’47” E, 290.71 feet
to a point;
thence S 8326’51” E, 358.45 feet to a point;  thence S 9000’00” E, 515.77 feet
to a point;
thence N 8821’53” E, 573.31 feet to a point;  thence N 8557’55” E, 697.61 feet
to a point;
thence N 8246’07” E, 519.90 feet to a point;  thence N 8133’04” E, 612.47 feet
to a point;
thence N 7751’53” E, 661.54 feet to a point;  thence N 7503’06” E, 444.00 feet
to a point;
thence S 8433’50” E, 172.70 feet to a point;  thence S 6039’38” E, 150.26 feet
to a point;
thence S 4501’18” E, 162.03 feet to a point;  thence S 2414’39” E, 179.44 feet
to a point;
thence S 0251’52” E, 163.82 feet to a point;  thence S 1739’46” W, 188.88 feet
to a point;
thence S 0107’27” W, 417.29 feet to a point;  thence S 0356’55” E, 594.45 feet
to a point;
thence S 0442’08” E, 599.20 feet to a point;  thence S 0748’22” E, 602.77 feet
to a point;
thence S 0918’01” E, 455.93 feet to a point;  thence S 0557’05” E, 394.80 feet
to a point;
thence S 0217’32” W, 409.36 feet to a point;  thence S 0810’07” W, 633.81 feet
to a point;
thence S 1232’16” W, 301.70 feet to a point;  thence S 0736’01” W, 495.19 feet
to a point;
thence S 0604’37” W, 386.66 feet to a point;  thence S 0052’07” W, 539.98 feet
to a point;
thence S 0159’58” E, 703.96 feet to a point;  thence S 0624’09” E, 367.08 feet
to a point;
thence S 1826’53” E, 310.46 feet to a point;  thence S 3939’56” E, 371.95 feet
to a point;
thence S 5933’12” E, 322.88 feet to a point;  thence S 4614’26” E, 272.04 feet
to a point;
thence S 2543’37” E, 245.18 feet to a point;  thence S 0212’16” E, 212.85 feet
to a point;
thence S 1756’26” W, 292.36 feet to a point;  thence S 2925’33” W, 516.58 feet
to a point;
thence S 3629’24” W, 702.10 feet to a point;  thence S 4409’28” W, 611.10 feet
to a point;
thence S 5409’03” W, 656.51 feet to a point;  thence S 6009’35” W, 509.66 feet
to a point;
thence S 6840’40” W, 562.45 feet to a point;  thence S 7337’20” W, 435.19 feet
to a point;
thence S 8128’32” W, 496.69 feet to a point;  thence S 8634’08” W, 410.08 feet
to a point;
thence N 8727’25” W, 368.77 feet to a point;  thence N 8300’14” W, 470.15 feet
to a point;
thence N 8125’22” W, 438.81 feet to a point;  thence N 8716’33” W, 344.23 feet
to a point;
thence S 8833’29” W, 325.09 feet to a point;  thence S 8105’30” W, 422.62 feet
to a point;
thence S 8331’18” W, 362.53 feet to a point;  thence S 8555’03” W, 229.81 feet
to a point;
thence N 8849’54” W, 401.24 feet to a point;  thence N 8448’34” W, 361.70 feet
to a point;
thence N 8105’30” W, 422.63 feet to a point;  thence N 7440’40” W, 526.29 feet
to a point;
thence N 6832’17” W, 536.60 feet to a point;  thence N 6327’08” W, 567.41 feet
to a point;
thence N 5509’57” W, 558.55 feet to a point;  thence N 4937’17” W, 505.11 feet
to a point;
thence N 4300’43” W, 660.08 feet to a point;  thence N 3650’57” W, 414.97 feet
to a point;
thence N 3031’08” W, 693.22 feet to a point;  thence N 2212’20” W, 671.53 feet
to a point;
thence N 1509’54” W, 406.84 feet to a point;  thence N 1104’42” W, 383.45 feet
to a point;
thence N 0756’58” W, 355.18 feet to a point;  thence N 0229’29” W, 376.66 feet
to a point;
thence N 0124’57” W, 331.36 feet to a point;  thence N 0742’07” E, 305.44 feet
to a point;
thence N 0245’34” E, 281.23 feet to the place of beginning, containing 2910.635
acres, more or less,
and excluding therefrom the lands contained within the Primary Area.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.04  PRIMARY AREA REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Prohibited Activities.  The storage and production of regulated
substances and the operation of sanitary landfills, landfills comprised of
demolition debris, salvage yards and junkyards are prohibited within the
Primary Area; unless such activity or facility has been granted a license by
the State of Ohio to operate or unless a variance has been granted pursuant to
Section
929.17.
 
   (b)   Use of regulated substances in conjunction with activities conducted
within the Primary Area are limited as follows; unless a variance has been
granted pursuant to Section
929.17:
      (1)    The aggregate of regulated substances, other than agricultural
chemicals, in use may not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons or four hundred forty
(440) pounds  at any one time.
      (2)    The use of agricultural chemicals (labeled for use and sale by
licensed personnel) shall be conducted by using best management practices.
 
   (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of Subsection
929.04(a), underground storage tanks, which exist on the effective date of this
Chapter, which are located within the Primary Area, which are fully compliant
with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to such tanks and which are
used exclusively to store fuel and lubricants for vehicle operation are
permitted to remain in use.  Replacement of underground storage tanks is
prohibited within the Primary Area with the exception of underground storage
tanks regulated by the Ohio Fire Marshall, Bureau of Underground Storage Tank
Regulation (BUSTR) and with the exception of heating fuel tanks in residential
use having a capacity equal to or less than five hundred fifty (550) gallons;
provided that these exceptions shall apply only to tanks which are fully
compliant with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to such tanks.
 
   (d)   An exclusion from the provisions of Subsection
929.04(b) is applicable to regulated substances which are cleaning agents;
provided, however that such cleaning agents are packaged for personal or
household use or are present in the same form and concentration as a product
packaged for use by the general public and; provided further, that the
aggregate inventory of such cleaning agents shall not exceed one hundred ten
(110) gallons or eight hundred eighty (880) pounds at any time.  In no case
shall this exclusion apply to hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon solvents.
 
   (e)   An exclusion from the provisions of Subsection
929.04(b) is applicable to:
      (1)   on-site use of building materials and paving materials in a mobile
container temporarily on-site for purposes of installing or applying the
building materials or paving materials and
      (2)   on-site use and storage of agricultural chemicals in a mobile
container temporarily on-site for purposes of applying the agricultural
chemicals.
[NOTE: THIS REGULATION DOES NOT RESTRICT THE USE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS
APPLIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.]
 
   (f)   Unless regulated by the Ohio Fire Marshall aboveground storage tanks
which are fully compliant with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining
to such tanks and which are used exclusively to store fuel and lubricants for
vehicle operation are permitted to remain in use provided they are protected by
secondary containment in accordance with Section
929.16 to prevent releases to the City’s well fields.
 
   (g)   Nothing in this Section should be construed to apply the provisions of
this Section to regulated substances contained in a vehicle and in use for the
proper functioning of such vehicle, including by way of example and not by way
of limitation, fuels, lubricants, antifreeze and the contents of batteries. 
This exemption does not apply to cargo being transported or stored in such
vehicle.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.05  SECONDARY AREA REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Prohibited Activities.  The operation of sanitary landfills, landfills
comprised of demolition debris, salvage yards and junkyards are prohibited
within the Secondary Area; unless such facility has been granted a license by
the State of Ohio to operate or unless a variance has been granted pursuant to
Section
929.17.
 
   (b)   Use, storage, handling and/or production of regulated substances
within the Secondary Area are limited as follows; unless a variance has been
granted pursuant to Section
929.17:
      (1)   The aggregate of regulated substances, other than agriculture
chemicals, in use, storage, handling and/or production may not exceed fifty-
five (55) gallons or four hundred forty (440) pounds  at any one time.
      (2)   The use, storage, and handling of agricultural chemicals (labeled
for use and sale by licensed personnel) shall be conducted by using best
management practices.
 
   (c)   An exclusion from the provisions of Subsection
929.05(b) is applicable to regulated substances which are cleaning agents;
provided however, such cleaning agents are packaged for personal or household
use or are present in the same form and concentration as a product packaged for
use by the general public, and; provided further, that the aggregate inventory
of such cleaning agents shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) gallons or eight
hundred eighty (880) pounds at any time.  In no case shall this exclusion apply
to hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon solvents.
 
   (d)   An exclusion from the provisions of Subsection
929.05(b) is applicable to:
      (1)   on-site use of building materials and paving materials in a mobile
container temporarily on-site for purposes of installing or applying the
building materials or paving materials and
      (2)   on-site use and storage of agricultural chemicals in a mobile
container temporarily on-site for purposes of applying the agricultural
chemicals.
[NOTE: THIS REGULATION DOES NOT RESTRICT THE USE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS
APPLIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.]
 
   (e)   Notwithstanding other provisions of Subsection
929.05(b), underground storage tanks, which exist on the effective date of this
Chapter, which are located within the Secondary Area, which are fully compliant
with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to such tanks and which are
used exclusively to store fuel and lubricants for vehicle operation are
permitted to remain in use.  Replacement of underground storage tanks is
prohibited within the Secondary Area with the exception of underground storage
tanks regulated by the Ohio Fire Marshall, Bureau of Underground Storage Tank
Regulation (BUSTR) and with the exception of heating fuel tanks in residential
use having a capacity equal to or less than five hundred fifty (550) gallons;
provided that these exceptions shall apply only to tanks which are fully
compliant with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to such tanks.
 
   (f)   Unless regulated by the Ohio Fire Marshall aboveground storage tanks
shall be protected by secondary containment in accordance with Section
929.16 to prevent releases to the City’s well fields.  Notwithstanding other
provisions of this Section
929.05, any underground storage tank may be replaced with an aboveground
storage tank which complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
 
   (g)   Nothing in this Section should be construed to apply the provisions of
this Section to regulated substances contained in a vehicle and in use for the
proper functioning of such vehicle, including by way of example and not by way
of limitation, fuels, lubricants, antifreeze and the contents of batteries. 
This exemption does not apply to cargo being transported or stored in such
vehicle.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.06  ADDITIONAL HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Handling of Regulated Substances.  No person shall, on public or
private property within the Primary or Secondary Areas, place, deposit, store,
process, use, produce, dispose of, transport, or release; or permit to be
placed, deposited, stored, processed, used, produced, disposed of, transported,
or released any regulated substance in violation of any applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.
 
   (b)   Vandalism.  No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, property, or equipment which is a part of or used in conjunction
with water facilities of a protected public water supply, or which results in
the violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
 
   (c)   Injection Wells.  No person shall construct use, or operate an
injection well within the Primary or Secondary Areas; unless such well has been
licensed by the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.07  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Regulated Substance Activity Inventory:
      (1)   Applicability:
         (A)   Each owner or occupant of any land in the Primary or Secondary
Areas shall file a Regulated Substance Activity Inventory Report with the
Health Commissioner.  Said Report shall be filed on or before December 31 of
each odd numbered year and shall be updated between reporting dates to report
added/new regulated substances and increased amounts of regulated substances on
the subject land.
         (B)   Each new owner or occupant of any land in the Primary or
Secondary Areas shall file a Regulated Substance Activity Inventory Report
within one hundred eighty days after taking possession of such land and
thereafter shall file Regulated Substance Activity Inventory Reports in
compliance with Subsection
929.07(a)(1)(A).  For purposes of this paragraph, "new" shall be defined as
subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter.
         (C)   Each person who owns, operates, or occupies more than one
location, within the Primary or Secondary Areas shall file the Regulated
Substance Activity Inventory Reports required under this Section for each
location.
         (D)   Each Certified Applicator applying agricultural chemicals within
the Primary or Secondary Areas shall provide a copy of his/her applicator’s
current license issued by the Ohio Department of Agriculture to the Health
Commissioner prior to applying any agricultural chemicals in either the Primary
or Secondary Areas.
         (E)   Regulated Substance Inventory Activity Reports shall disclose
the following data:
            (i)   The identity of the reporting person and such information as
the Health Commissioner may request to enable him/her to communicate with the
reporting person.
            (ii)   A description of the area(s) where regulated substances will
be stored and/or applied on the relevant site(s).
            (iii)   Such information as the Health Commissioner may require to
identify the type and amounts of regulated substances stored and/or applied on
the relevant site(s); including a copy of the MSDS sheet for each regulated
substance stored on the relevant site(s) during the reporting period,
            (iv)   Total annual on-site storage of regulated substances for the
relevant site(s).
      (2)   Exclusions from Activity Inventory Reporting:
         (A)   Any exclusion set forth in this Subparagraph
929.07(a)(2) shall apply; provided that said exclusion does not substantially
increase any risk or hazard to the public health or water supply, wells or well
fields; and provided further that any release shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection
929.07(b).  Any exclusions granted herein shall not remove or limit the
liability and responsibility of any person.
         (B)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Activity Inventory
reporting is hereby authorized for incidental uses of regulated substances
provided the uses are limited as follows:
            (i)   The aggregate of regulated substances in use may not exceed
twenty (20) gallons or one hundred and sixty (160) pounds at any one time and
            (ii)   The total use of regulated substances may not exceed fifty-
five (55) gallons or four hundred forty (440) pounds during any period of
twelve (12) consecutive months.
         (C)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Inventory Activity
reporting is hereby authorized for regulated substances which are cleaning
agents; provided, however, such cleaning agents are packaged for personal or
household use or are present in the same form and concentration as a product
packaged for use by the general public, and provided the aggregate inventory of
such cleaning agents shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) gallons or eight
hundred eighty (880) pounds at any time.  In no case shall regulated substances
to which this exclusion applies include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon
solvents.
         (D)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Inventory Activity
reporting is hereby authorized for the transportation of regulated substances
through the Primary or Secondary Areas; provided that the transportation
vehicle is in compliance with applicable local, State, and Federal laws and
regulations and provided that the transportation vehicle is in continuous
transit, making delivery, or is stopped for a period of time not to exceed
twenty-four (24) hours.
         (E)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Inventory Activity
reporting is hereby authorized for owners and occupants of single or two family
residences; provided however, the storage and use of regulated substances are
related to the maintenance of the residence or vehicles under control of the
occupant and provided regulated substances are appropriately disposed of to a
permitted solid waste facility or a permitted publicly-owned wastewater
treatment works.
         (F)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Inventory Activity
Reporting is hereby granted to on-site storage within the Secondary Area of a
maximum one-year supply of agriculture chemicals to be used for routine on-site
agriculture operations.
         (G)   An exclusion from Regulated Substance Inventory Activity
Reporting is hereby granted to on-site storage of heating fuels for residential
use stored in a tank having a capacity equal to or less than five hundred fifty
(550) gallons.
 
   (b)   Release of Regulated Substances:
      (1)   Any person with direct knowledge of a release of a regulated
substance within the Primary or Secondary Areas shall, if such release escapes
containment or contacts a non-impervious ground surface and is not immediately
and completely remediated, give notice:
         (A)   to the City by dialing “911” and advising of the release and
         (B)   to the Services Director or to the operator on duty at the
affected or potentially affected water treatment facility by telephone, within
thirty (30) minutes.  The notification shall include, at a minimum, the
location of the incident, name and telephone number, date and time thereof,
type of substance(s), concentration and volume, and control or corrective
action taken.  Such notification shall in no way alleviate or otherwise affect
a person’s obligations to comply with all other applicable local, State, and
Federal laws and regulations.
            (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
      (2)   The application of agricultural chemicals used in routine
agricultural operations and applied using best management practices, shall not
be considered a release subject to the reporting provisions of this Chapter.
      (3)   Any person who releases said substance(s) shall be liable for any
expense, loss or damages incurred by the owner of a protected public water
supply and/or by the operator of a protected public water supply for damages
resulting from such an incident, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed
on account thereof under City, State and Federal law.  Said entity or person
shall document and maintain sufficient records so as to reflect accurately the
circumstances related to any such incident and develop and implement procedures
to substantially eliminate the likelihood of reoccurrence of such releases as
soon as practicable following the incident, but no later than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the incident.
 
   (c)   Falsifying Information.  No person shall make any false statement,
representation, or certification in any report or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter.
 
   (d)   Retention of Records.  Any reports or records compiled or submitted
pursuant to this Chapter shall be maintained by the owner of such reports or
records for a minimum of five (5) years or so long as enforcement or judicial
proceedings are being pursued, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.08  NUISANCE DETERMINATION; PROHIBITION.
   (a)   When a reasonable basis to believe that a public nuisance exists in
the Primary or Secondary Areas, the Health Commissioner shall inspect or cause
the inspection of the premises on which such public nuisance is believed to
exist.
 
   (b)   No owner or occupant of a premises in the Primary or Secondary Areas
shall permit the existence of a public nuisance to continue on such premises.
 
   (c)   No person shall release, or permit to be released, treated or
untreated sewage, the overflow drainage or contents of a sewage tank, or other
putrescible, impure, or offensive wastes into an abandoned water supply, well,
spring, or cistern or into a natural or artificial well, sink hole, crevice, or
other opening extending into limestone, sandstone, shale, or other rock
formation, or normal ground water table located in the Primary or Secondary
Areas.
 
   (d)   No person shall release or cause to be released, treated or untreated
sewage, the drainage or contents of a sewage tank, or other putrescible or
offensive wastes onto the surface of the ground, into any street, road, alley,
open excavation, underground drain, land drain ditch, adjoining property, water
course, or body of water located in the Primary or Secondary Areas.
 
   (e)   No person shall release any liquid, solid or gas into a sewage
disposal system, including, but not limited to, septic tanks, aerobic type
treatment systems, filters, leaching tile fields, mound systems, constructed
wetlands, rock plant filters, drywells, building sewers, and privies or parts
thereof located in the Primary or Secondary Areas; unless such sewage disposal
system has been inspected by the Health Commissioner within the preceding
twelve months and has been determined by the Health Commissioner to be a
properly functioning sewage disposal system.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.09  NOTICE AND ABATEMENT.
   (a)   If, upon inspection, it is determined that a public nuisance exists,
then the Health Commissioner shall send or deliver a written notice to abate
such public nuisance to each owner or occupant, or both, who caused or
permitted the public nuisance to exist.  Such notice shall identify the public
nuisance and require the owner or occupant, or both, to abate the public
nuisance within seven (7) days of such notice.  Failure to abate the public
nuisance within seven (7) days of such notice, as provided herein, may cause
the City to abate the public nuisance at the expense of the owner or occupant,
or both, who caused or permitted such public nuisance to exist.
 
   (b)   The Health Commissioner shall prepare or cause the preparation of a
written report, including photographs, of every public nuisance for which a
notice to abate is issued.  All such reports shall remain on file with the
Health Commissioner until the public nuisance is abated.
(Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.10  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   In the event the Health Commissioner or Services Director determines that
the City wellheads or well fields will be threatened by the continuance of a
public nuisance and determines that the designated public nuisance must be
removed immediately to prevent imminent potential injury to the City’s
wellheads or well fields, the Health Commissioner and Services Director shall
report such facts to the City Manager, and the City Manager shall cause
whatever immediate action is necessary to abate such public nuisance at the
expense of the property owner for all accrued costs.  When an emergency public
nuisance has been determined by the aforesaid officers, the abatement shall be
carried out without regard for the requirements of Sections
929.08,
929.09, and
929.11 through
929.14, except that the City Manager shall, to the extent reasonably permitted
by the exigency of the circumstances, give the owners of the subject premises,
written or personal notice of his intended action and an opportunity for
hearing thereon.
(Ord. 00-456. Passed 12-19-00.)
 
929.11  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY THE HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   (a)   Should such public nuisance not be abated at the expiration time
stated in such notice issued by the Health Commissioner or such additional time
as the Health Commissioner may grant, the Health Commissioner shall be
authorized, at any time thereafter to enter upon such premises and the owner
and occupant shall permit him entry to abate the public nuisance by taking such
action as may be required.
 
   (b)   In abating such nuisance the Health Commissioner may call upon any
department of the City for whatever assistance may be necessary, or may, by
private contract, obtain the abatement thereof.
 
   (c)   In abating a nuisance, whether under the emergency procedure of
Section
929.10(a) or under the regular procedure set forth in this Chapter, the cost of
the abatement action may be recovered from the owner in the following
procedure:
      (1)   The owner or owners may be billed directly for the cost of the
abatement.  If the owner or owners are billed, the bill for the cost of the
abatement shall be paid within sixty (60) days after receipt of the bill.
      (2)   If costs are not so recovered, then the City may cause the cost of
the abatement to be levied as an assessment and recovered in accordance with
law.
      (3)   If such an abatement of a nuisance is at no cost to the City, or if
the City is reimbursed for its costs, the property owner shall be relieved of
any assessment.
         (Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.12  NOTICES.
   Whenever the Health Commissioner determines that there has been a violation
of any provision of this Chapter, except where a violation citation tag has
been issued pursuant to Section
929.13, he, or a law enforcement officer having jurisdiction, may give notice
of such violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with
this Chapter as hereinafter provided.  Such notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, refer to the section or sections of this
Chapter violated and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the procedure for appeal,
except emergency orders issued pursuant to Section
929.10;
   (e)   Be served on the owner or occupant in person.  However, this notice
and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or occupant if a
copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the property affected.  If a registered or certified mail
envelope is returned with an endorsement showing that service was refused, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address,
residence, or place of business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on the date of
mailing.  If the registered or certified mail envelope is returned with an
endorsement showing that service was unclaimed, the notice may be served by
ordinary mail to his last known mailing address, residence or place of
business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing; provided that the
ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery.
      (1)   The notice and order may, in the alternative, be served by leaving
it at his last known residence or place of business in the presence of a family
member or other responsible person of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the general nature of the contents thereof.
      (2)   If service is not accomplished by any of the above means, then a
notification of the existence of the notice and order may be published at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation.
         (Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.13  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS.
   The Health Commissioner is authorized and directed to provide inspectors
with citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due notice and
summons to the person responsible for violations of this Chapter.
   (a)   Such citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the section of this Chapter violated,
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place, and it shall be made
on oath before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
   (b)   The citation tag shall be served on such person in accordance with the
provisions of Section
929.12.
   (c)   The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of appearing
at the time and place stated, he may, within that stated time, appear
personally at the office of the Clerk of the Municipal Court of Clark County,
Ohio, and on signing a plea of guilty and a waiver of trial pay a stated fine
and stated costs, if any.  The citation shall inform the defendant that he may
be arrested if he fails to appear either at such Clerk's office or at the time
and place stated in the citation.
   (d)   When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for the arrest of that person.
   (e)   When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed in accordance with Rule 5 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   The citation tag as herein provided, shall be sufficient notice,
summons, and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
that the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags or a legal notice of violation as provided by Section
929.12 in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
      (Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.14  APPEAL TO CITY MANAGER.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, any owner of a property
shall have the right to appeal from any determination of the Health
Commissioner or of the Services Director, made in administering this Chapter,
to the City Manager and to appear before the City Manager at a time and place
to be determined by the City Manager.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (b)   Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Manager in writing
within three (3) days after receipt of any notice given under the provisions of
this Chapter.
(Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.15  BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (a)   No person shall install, use, operate, or maintain any hydrant,
faucet, or any kind of outlet for any liquid connected to a well located within
the Primary or Secondary Areas; unless a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention devise is operating properly between such hydrant, faucet or any
outlet for any liquid connected to a well, and the well.
 
   (b)   An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device of
the type designated shall be installed to protect the wells located on the
premises of facilities located in the Primary and Secondary Areas; unless the
Services Director determines that no real or potential health, pollutional or
other hazard to the City’s well fields exists.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (c)   Any backflow prevention device installed  pursuant to this Chapter
shall be of a model or construction approved by the Services Director and the
Ohio E.P.A. and shall be tested and be found to function properly and shall be
certified by an inspector certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3703.04 and 3703.05
and Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3701-37 before the device is put in use.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (d)   Every backflow prevention device required under this Chapter shall be
installed at a location and in a manner approved by the Services Director and
shall be installed by and at the expense of the property owner.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (e)   It shall be the duty of the property owner of any premises on which
backflow prevention devices have been installed to have thorough inspections
and operational tests made of the devices at such intervals and in such manner
as may be required by the Services Director and by the Ohio E.P.A., but in no
event shall such tests be made at greater than twelve month intervals.  These
inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the property owner and shall
be performed by an inspector certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3703.04 and
3703.05 and Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3701-37.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (f)   Backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced
at the expense of the property owner within fourteen days after they are found
to be defective.  Records of such inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul
shall be kept by the property owner and made available to the Services Director
and the Health Commissioner.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (g)   Backflow prevention devices shall be tested during normal business
hours.  Manifold or dual settings of the devices should be considered for
premises requiring uninterrupted water service.  Backflow prevention devices
set in manifold shall meet the minimum flow requirements of a single device of
the proper size.
 
   (h)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Services Director
or the Ohio E.P.A. prior to the effective date of this regulation and which are
properly maintained shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance
requirements, be excluded from the requirements of subsections (c) and (d)
hereof, if the Services Director and the Ohio E.P.A. are assured that the
devices will satisfactorily protect the
City’s well field.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (i)   The Health Commissioner shall maintain a current record of all
backflow prevention devices which are a part of any water system connected to a
well in the Primary or Secondary Areas.
 
   (j)   Persons performing inspections as required in this section shall,
within fifteen days of performing such inspection, file with the Health
Commissioner a test report.  The test report shall include the following data:
      (1)   Type of backflow prevention device.
      (2)   Size of backflow prevention device.
      (3)   Location of backflow prevention device.
      (4)   Model designation of backflow prevention device.
      (5)   Date backflow prevention device was installed.
      (6)   Test results before backflow prevention device was repaired.
      (7)   Description of repairs made.   
      (8)   Description of materials used in making repairs.
      (9)   Results of a final test of the backflow prevention device after the
repair or installation.
      (10)   Inspector's signature.
      (11)   Date of the inspection.
      (12)   Certification by the owner of the premises on which the backflow
prevention device is located certifying that the backflow prevention device has
been in constant use at the location of the backflow prevention device during
the entire proscribed interval between test periods and that during that period
the backflow prevention device was not by-passed, made inoperative or removed
without proper authorization.
      (13)   Such other information as the Health Commissioner deems necessary.
   The Health Commissioner may impose a reasonable filing fee for reports filed
to recover administrative costs associated with receiving and processing such
reports.
 
   (k)   The definitions of terms contained in Section
913.03 of the Codified Ordinances shall be applicable to this Section.
(Ord. 99-52. Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.16  SECONDARY CONTAINMENT AND RELEASE MITIGATION.
   (a)   Secondary containment protection must be:
      (1)   Designed, installed, and operated to prevent any migration of
regulated substances or accumulated liquid out of a tank, container or other
thing or area intended to confine a regulated substance and into soil, ground
water, or surface water at any time during the use of the tank, container or
other thing or area intended to confine a regulated substance; and
      (2)   Capable of detecting and collecting releases and accumulated
liquids until the collected material is removed.
 
   (b)   To meet the requirements of paragraph (a) of this Section, secondary
containment systems must be, at a minimum:
      (1)   Constructed of or lined with material that are compatible with the
regulated substance to be placed in the tank system and must have sufficient
strength and thickness to prevent failure owing to pressure gradients
(including static head and external hydrological forces), physical contact with
the regulated substance to which it is exposed, climatic conditions, and the
stress of daily operation (including stresses from nearby vehicular traffic);
      (2)   Placed on a foundation or base capable of providing support to the
secondary containment system, resistance to pressure gradients above and below
the system, and capable of preventing failure due to settlement, compression,
or uplift;
      (3)   Provided with a leak-detection system that is designed and operated
so that it will detect the failure of either the primary or secondary
containment structure or the presence of any release of regulated substance or
accumulated liquid in the secondary containment system within twenty-four
hours, or at the earliest practicable time if the owner or operator can
demonstrate to the Service Director that existing detection technologies or
site conditions will not allow detection of a release within twenty-four hours;
and
         (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
      (4)   Sloped or otherwise designed or operated to drain and remove
liquids resulting from releases or precipitation. Released regulated substances
and accumulated precipitation must be removed from the secondary containment
system within twenty-four hours, or in as timely a manner as is possible to
prevent harm to human health and the environment, if the owner or operator can
demonstrate to the Services Director that removal of the released regulated
substances or accumulated precipitation cannot be accomplished within twenty-
four hours.
         (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (c)   Secondary containment for tanks must include one or more of the
following devices:
      (1)   A liner (external to the tank);
      (2)   A vault;
      (3)   A double-walled tank; or
      (4)   An equivalent device as determined by the Services Director.
         (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (d)   In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of
this Section, secondary containment systems must satisfy the following
requirements.
      (1)   External liner systems must be:
         (A)   Designed or operated to contain one hundred per cent of the
capacity of the largest tank within its boundary;
         (B)   Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the collection
system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or infiltration. Such
additional capacity must be sufficient to contain precipitation from a twenty-
five-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event;
         (C)   Free of cracks or gaps; and
         (D)   Designed and installed to surround the tank completely and to
cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the regulated
substance if the regulated substance is released from the tank(s) (i.e.,
capable of preventing lateral as well as vertical migration of the regulated
substance).
      (2)   Vault systems must be:
         (A)   Designed or operated to contain one hundred per cent of the
capacity of the largest tank within its boundary;
         (B)   Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the collection
system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or infiltration. Such
additional capacity must be sufficient to contain precipitation from a twenty-
five-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event;
         (C)   Constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at all
joints (if any);
         (D)   Provided with an impermeable interior coating or lining that is
compatible with the stored regulated substance and that will prevent migration
of regulated substances into the concrete;
         (E)   Provided with a means to protect against the formation of and
ignition of vapors within the vault, if the regulated substance being stored or
treated is an ignitable regulated substance, or a reactive regulated substance
and may form an ignitable or explosive vapor;
         (F)   Provided with an exterior moisture barrier or be otherwise
designed or operated to prevent migration of moisture into the vault if the
vault is subject to hydraulic pressure.
      (3)   Double-walled tanks must be:
         (A)   Designed as an integral structure (i.e., an inner tank
completely enveloped within an outer shell) so that any release from the inner
tank is contained by the outer shell;
         (B)   Protected, if constructed of metal, from both corrosion of the
primary tank interior and of the external surface of the outer shell; and
         (C)   Provided with a built-in, continuous leak-detection system
capable of detecting a release within twenty-four hours, or at the earliest
practicable time, if the owner or operator can demonstrate to the Services
Director, and the Services Director concludes, that the existing detection
technology or site conditions would not allow detection of a release within
twenty-four hours.
            (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (e)   Ancillary equipment must be provided with secondary containment (e.g.,
trench, jacketing, double-walled piping) that meets the requirements of
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section, except for:
      (1)   Aboveground piping (exclusive of flanges, joints, valves, and other
connections) that are visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis;
      (2)   Welded flanges, welded joints, and welded connections, that are
visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis;
      (3)   Sealless or magnetic coupling pumps and sealless valves, that are
visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis; and
      (4)   Pressurized aboveground piping systems with automatic shut-off
devices (e.g., excess flow check valves, flow metering shutdown devices, loss
of pressure-actuated shut-off devices) that are visually inspected for leaks on
a daily basis.
 
   (f)   Release mitigation measures include the following:
      (1)   Having on hand and readily available materials or devices to absorb
liquid releases,
      (2)   Having on hand and readily available decontaminating and/or
neutralizing agents to mitigate release of a regulated substance,
      (3)   Having an operable and effective mechanism to stop the addition of
regulated substances to a leaking a tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance, and
      (4)   Such other measures or devices as the Services Director may
determine are effective and practical to mitigate a release of a regulated
substance and prevent the released regulated substance form endangering the
City’s well field.
         (Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
929.17  VARIANCES
   (a)   Persons regulated under this Chapter may obtain a variance from the
requirements of Sections
929.04,
929.05,
929.15 and/or
929.16 of this Chapter if the Service Director finds, as a result of a
demonstration by such regulated person, that alternative design and operating
practices and/or release mitigation measurers which, together with location
characteristics, will prevent the migration of any regulated substance into the
ground water or surface water at least as effectively as measures and
limitations prescribed in this Chapter or that, in the event of a release that
does migrate to ground water or surface water, no substantial present or
potential hazard will be posed to the City’s well field.
      (1)   In deciding whether to grant a variance based on a demonstration of
equivalent protection of ground water and surface water, the Service Director
will consider:
         (A)   The nature and quantity of the regulated substances;
         (B)   The proposed alternate design and operation and/or release
mitigation measurers;
         (C)   The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including the
thickness of soils present between the tank system and ground water; and
         (D)   All other factors that would influence the quality and mobility
of the regulated substances and the potential for them to migrate to ground
water or surface water.
      (2)   In deciding whether to grant a variance based on a demonstration of
no substantial present or potential hazard, the Service Director will consider:
         (A)   The potential adverse effects on ground water and surface water,
taking into account:
            (i)   The physical and chemical characteristics of the regulated
substance in the tank system, including its potential for migration;
            (ii)   The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and
surrounding land;
            (iii)   The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse
effects; and
         (B)   The potential adverse effects of a release on ground-water
quality, taking into account:
            (i)   The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of
ground-water flow;
            (ii)   The proximity and withdrawal rates of ground-water users;
            (iii)   The current and future uses of ground water in the area;
and
            (iv)   The existing quality of ground water, including other
sources of contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground-water
quality; and
         (C)   The potential adverse effects of a release on surface-water
quality, taking into account:
            (i)   The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of
ground-water flow;
            (ii)   The patterns of rainfall in the region;
            (iii)   The proximity of the tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance to surface waters;
            (iv)   The current and future uses of surface waters in the area
and any water quality standards established for those surface waters; and
            (v)   The existing quality of surface water, including other
sources of contamination and the cumulative impact on surface-water quality;
and
      (3)   The owner or operator of a tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance, for which a variance from secondary
containment had been granted in accordance with the requirements of this
Section, at which a release of a regulated substance has occurred from the
primary tank, container or other thing or area intended to confine a regulated
substance, must:
         (A)   Cease use and prevent the flow or addition of regulated
substances into the tank, container or other thing or area intended to confine
a regulated substance. The owner or operator must immediately stop the flow of
regulated substances into the tank, container or other thing or area intended
to confine a regulated substance or secondary containment system and inspect
the system to determine the cause of the release.
         (B)   Remove all regulated substances from the tank, container or
other thing or area intended to confine a regulated substance or secondary
containment system.
            (i)   If the release was from the tank, container or other thing or
area intended to confine a regulated substance, the owner/operator must, within
twenty-four hours after detection of the leak, or, if the owner/operator
demonstrates that it is not possible, at the earliest practicable time, remove
as much of the regulated substance as is necessary to prevent further release
of regulated substances to the environment and to allow inspection and repair
of the tank, container or other thing or area intended to confine a regulated
substance to be performed.
            (ii)   If the material released was to a secondary containment
system, all released materials must be removed within twenty-four hours or in
as timely a manner as is possible to prevent harm to human health and the
environment.
         (C)   Containment of visible releases to the environment. The owner/
operator must immediately conduct a visual inspection of the release and, based
upon that inspection:
            (i)   Prevent further migration of the leak or spill to soils or
surface water; and
            (ii)   Remove, and properly dispose of, any visible contamination
of the soil or surface water.
         (D)   Provision of secondary containment, repair, or closure.
            (i)   Unless the owner/operator satisfies the requirements of
paragraphs (D)(ii) to (D)(iv) of this Subsection, the tank, container or other
thing or area intended to confine a regulated substance must be closed.
            (ii)   If the cause of the release was a spill that has not damaged
the integrity of the system, the owner/operator may return the system to
service as soon as the released regulated substance is removed and repairs, if
necessary, are made.
            (iii)   If the cause of the release was a leak from the primary
tank, container or other thing or area intended to confine a regulated
substance into the secondary containment system, the system must be repaired
prior to returning the tank, container or other thing or area intended to
confine a regulated substance to service.
            (iv)   If the source of the release was a leak to the environment
from a component of a tank system without secondary containment, the owner/
operator must provide the component of the system from which the leak occurred
with secondary containment that satisfies the requirements of Section
929.16 before it can be returned to service, unless the source of the leak is
an aboveground portion of a tank, container or other thing or area intended to
confine a regulated substance that can be inspected visually. If the source is
an aboveground component that can be inspected visually, the component must be
repaired and may be returned to service without secondary containment as long
as the requirements of paragraph (v) of this Subsection are satisfied. 
Additionally, if a leak has occurred in any portion of a tank system component
that is not readily accessible for visual inspection (e.g., the bottom of an
inground or onground tank, container or other thing or area intended to confine
a regulated substance), the entire component must be provided with secondary
cotification of major repairs. If the owner/operator has repaired a tank,
container or other thing or area intended to confine a regulated substance in
accordance with this paragraph (D), and the repair has been extensive (e.g.,
installation of an internal liner; repair of a ruptured primary containment or
secondary containment vessel), the tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance must not be returned to service
unless the owner/operator has obtained a certification by an independent,
qualified, registered professional engineer in accordance with paragraph (D) of
rule 3745-50-42 of the Ohio Administrative Code that the repaired system is
capable of handling regulated substances without release for the intended life
of the system. This certification must be submitted to the Service Director
within seven days after returning the tank, container or other thing or area
intended to confine a regulated substance to use.
         (E)   Prevent the migration of regulated substances to ground water or
surface water, if possible, and decontaminate or remove contaminated soil.
 
   (b)   To request a variance under this Section the regulated person shall
make application to the Service Director in writing by the regulated person for
a variance under this Section explaining why a variance is needed and providing
the Service Director with sufficient information to conclude that a variance
mat be granted pursuant to the requirements of this Section.  If a variance is
granted under this Section, the Service Director will require the recipient of
the variance to construct and operate any tank system for which a variance is
granted in the manner that was determined by the Service Director to meet the
requirements for the variance.
 
   (c)   The Service Director shall issue a written determination granting or
denying the variance requested by a regulated person under this Section.
 
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, an affected regulated
person shall have the right to appeal from any determination of the Service
Director, made in administering this Section, to the City Manager and to appear
before the City Manager at a time and place to be determined by the City
Manager.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (e)   Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Manager in writing
within three (3) days after receipt of the written determination issued
pursuant to Subsection (c) of this Section.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
929.99  PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any owner or occupant of property who fails to abate the existence of
a public nuisance as required by Section
929.08 et seq. is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter, a violation
of any such provision is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 
   (b)   Any person who violates Subsections
929.06 (b) or (c) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 
   (c)   Any owner of property who fails to comply with the requirements set
forth in this Chapter may have their City water service shut off as described
under Chapter
911.17 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 16-259. Passed 9-13-16.)
 
   (d)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this Chapter, all
civil remedies which shall be available to the City, including injunction.
(Ord. 99-52.  Passed 2-16-99.)
 
 
 
TITLE FOUR—Engineering Regulations
Chap. 
931.   Public Infrastructure Improvements.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 931
Public Infrastructure Improvements
931.01   Engineering drawings.
931.02   Existing facilities.
931.03   Streets.
931.04   Storm sewers.
931.05   Sanitary sewers.
931.06   Water mains.
931.07   Street lights.
931.08   Grading plans.
 
931.01  ENGINEERING DRAWINGS.
   (a)   Preparation.  Developers of private property shall submit to the
Service Director or designee for preliminary and final approval, drawings of
engineering details of all existing and proposed facilities and utilities which
will become the property of, or maintained by, The City of Springfield, Ohio. 
Drawings shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered
professional engineer in the State of Ohio and bear his signature and stamp of
the seal prescribed by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Surveyors.  All engineering drawings shall be prepared on sheets
24-inch by 36-inch size out to out of the trimming edges.
 
   (b)   Scale.  The plan shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
or less, and the profile shall be drawn on the same scale horizontal with a ten
to one exaggeration (example, one inch equals 50 foot horizontal, one inch
equals five foot vertical).  Details of intersections, cul-de-sacs, and
miscellaneous special items shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 20
foot.
 
   (c)   Bench Marks.  All elevations shall be on U.S.G.S. datum and a complete
description, location, and elevation of at least two bench marks used shall be
shown on the plans.  Additional bench marks shall be required if spacing
exceeds 1,500 foot. All bench marks disturbed during construction shall be re-
established by the developer prior to final acceptance of the improvements by
the City.
   (d)   Specifications and Standard Drawings.  All construction and materials
shall comply with the current City of Springfield specifications and standard
drawings on file in the Service Department.  City of Springfield specifications
and standard drawings shall be referenced on engineering drawings.
   (e)   Construction.  No construction may begin until the final plans are
approved by the Service Director or designee and all fees are paid.  The
Service Department office shall be notified 48 hours in advance of any
construction so that inspection may be provided.  This notification policy
shall be stated on engineering drawings.
   (f)   As-Built Drawings.  After the development has been completed, "as-
built drawings" shall be turned over to the Service Director or desginee.  The
original engineer or surveyor of record shall certify the "as-built drawings". 
These plans shall show the following items in detail:
      (1)   Water and sewer mains located in reference to the curb line.
      (2)   Fire hydrants and water valves.
      (3)   Water services.
      (4)   Plan and profile of all main sewers including manhole locations.
      (5)   House connections (sewer location at curb line referenced to the
nearest street right-of-way line and measured along the curb line.)
      (6)   Final curb elevations and stationing.
      (7)   Grading plan including limits and grades of detention/retention
areas.
      (8)   Typical sections of all pavements.
These plans shall be submitted in one of the following formats:  mylar
drawings, computer disk in autocad format, or computer disk in a DXF file
format.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.02  EXISTING FACILITIES.
   The existing location of all utilities, buildings, driveways, streets, and
topography connecting to the improvement for a distance of at least 200 feet
adjacent to the improvement or to the point of connection to existing
facilities shall be shown on the plan and profile.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95.)
 
931.03  STREETS.
   (a)   The plan shall show the stationing on the centerline of all streets
and the station and angle of all intersecting streets.  The profile shall show
the elevations of the existing ground, the proposed centerline, and the sewer
grade as well as the location of all existing and proposed utilities.
 
   (b)   All streets within the development shall be improved the full width
and length of the proposed street right-of-way to the plat line, and a typical
cross section of the new streets shall be shown.
 
   (c)   Changes in grade shall be made by vertical curves of minimum length
subject to the design standards in the Ohio Department of Transportation
Location and Design Manual, latest edition.  The point of curvature and point
of tangency of all vertical curves shall be stationed, and elevations shall be
shown on 25-foot stations along the entire length of the vertical curve.
 
   (d)   All street grades shall be centerline grades, and details of drainage
and elevations at street intersections shall be shown.
 
   (e)   Minimum rate of grade on streets shall be .5 percent or 6 inches per
100 feet on streets with curb and gutter.
 
   (f)   Concrete curb, gutter, and sidewalk where required shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard drawings and specifications on file
in the Service Department.
 
   (g)   Manholes and water valves must be adjusted to the finished street
surface after the placing of the leveling course but prior to the placing of
the finished asphalt course.
 
   (h)   The entire right-of-way of all streets shall be graded full width
regardless of whether or not sidewalks are required.  All minor streets shall
be paved between curbs as follows: 
      (1)   4-1/2 inch (compacted) aggregate base course, minimum 90 percent
crushed (Item 304); followed by
         4-1/2 inch  (compacted) aggregate base course, minimum 90 percent
crushed (Item 304); followed by
         prime coat of a minimum of 0.5 gallon per square yard of MC-0, MC-1 or
RT-2 (Item 408); followed by
         2 inch asphalt concrete (Item 402); followed by
         1 inch asphalt concrete: (Item 404): or
      (2)   4 inch bituminous aggregate base (Item 301); followed by
         1-1/2 inch asphalt concrete (Item 402)
         1-1/2 inch asphalt concrete (Item 404)
   NOTE:  The item numbers referred to are from the City of Springfield
Construction and Material Specifications, latest edition; and all materials and
construction shall comply with these specifications.
 
Urban thoroughfares, rural thoroughfares, collector streets, and special
streets shall be designed in accordance with the Ohio Department of
Transportation Location and Design Manual, latest edition.  The asphalt
concrete paving shall not be done until all utilities have been installed
including all house services.  The surface course shall not be paved until all
utilities have been accepted by the City.
 
   (i)   Cross sections shall be shown every 50 feet and shall be drawn to one
inch equals ten foot horizontal and one inch equals five foot vertical.
 
   (j)   Signing and pavement markings shall be installed at all appropriate
locations. Plans shall be submitted which are designed in accordance with the
Uniform Manual Of Traffic Control Devices, latest edition.  Street name signs
conforming to City of Springfield standards shall be placed at all
intersections.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95.)
 
   (k)   All traffic signal support devices shall be mast-arm type
installations unless deemed impractical by the Service Director or designee.
(Ord. 03-174.  Passed 4-29-03; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.04  STORM SEWERS.
   (a)   The engineer for the developer shall lay out the street to follow
natural drainage as much as possible and avoid low points or pockets between
street intersections.  If low points between intersections cannot be avoided,
drainage easements through the lots shall be provided.
 
   (b)   All sewers shall be laid within the street right-of-way wherever
possible.
 
   (c)   Street storm sewers shall be designed for a ten-year design storm. 
Storm water management and erosion control for the entire development shall be
provided in accordance with Chapter
961.  Minimum storm sewer size shall be twelve inch.
 
   (d)   Storm sewers shall be constructed at a depth sufficient to serve all
the area within the watershed which may drain through the area being developed
and deep enough to allow for construction of water mains and sanitary sewers.
 
   (e)   Manholes shall be constructed at the junction of two or more sewers at
the termini, at all changes in size, alignment, and grade, and at a distance
not to exceed 400 feet.  For storm sewers 42 inches in diameter and larger,
spacing may be increased to 500 feet.
 
   (f)   Catch basins shall be constructed on the upstream side of the
crosswalks, at all low points in the street, at points where drainage ditches
enter the area being developed, at intersections, and on streets at distances
not to exceed 400 feet. Cross street drains shall not be used at intersections.
 
   (g)   Storm sewers, manholes, catch basins, and appurtenances shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard drawings and specifications on file
in the Service Department.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.05  SANITARY SEWERS.
   (a)   Sanitary sewers shall be designed to flow half full.  The quantity of
sewage shall be determined by use of 100 gallon per day per capita for the
entire service or drainage area which may drain through the area being
developed, plus wastewater flow from industrial plants and major institutional
and commercial facilities.  Water use data, or other justification upon which a
better flow estimate is based, may be submitted for consideration.  In
addition, a peaking factor shall be applied which can be calculated using the
ratio of peak hourly flow to design average flow chart provided in the
Recommended Standards For Wastewater Facilities, latest edition.  All sanitary
sewers shall be designed to have a minimum velocity of two feet per second.
 
   (b)   The minimum size of a main sewer shall be eight inches in diameter and
shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications for installation of
sanitary and storm sewers on file in the Service Department.  The minimum size
house connection shall be four inch.
 
   (c)   Sanitary sewers shall be constructed at a depth sufficient to serve
all the tributary area which may drain through the area being developed. The
sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed not less than five feet deep and
shall be deep enough to provide clearance for storm sewers and water mains and
to provide not less than three feet of fall between the hydraulic gradient of
the sewer and the basement, but in no case shall the top of the main sewer be
less than five feet below the finished street grade.
 
   (d)   House connections shall be connected to the main sewer by use of four
inch by eight inch, or four inch by twelve inch "Y" branches on eight-inch and
twelve-inch sewers and by four inch stubs on sewers larger than twelve inches.
 
   (e)   House connections shall be laid on a minimum slope of two percent.
 
   (f)   Where a pipe enters a manhole two feet or more above the manhole
invert, a drop manhole is necessary.  The drop manhole shall have an outside
drop connection as shown in the City's standard drawings.  Where the difference
in elevation between the incoming sewer and manhole invert is less than two
feet, the invert shall be filleted to prevent solids deposition.
 
   (g)   Standard manholes shall be constructed at all junctions of two or more
sewers, at all changes in size of pipe, at all changes in grade, at all changes
in alignment, at the ends of all main sewers, and at intervals not to exceed
400 feet.
 
   (h)   Manholes, sewers, and appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance
with the standard drawings and specifications on file in the Service
Department.
   (i)   All sanitary sewer plans shall be submitted to the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) for approval. The developer shall prepare all forms and
pay all fees necessary for submission of the plans to the EPA. All sanitary
sewer plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Recommended Standards For
Wastewater Facilities, latest edition.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.06  WATER MAINS.
   (a)   Water mains shall be designed in accordance with this section.  Water
main materials shall conform to City of Springfield Construction and Material
Specifications, latest edition, on file in the Service Department.  The
developer shall consult the City's master water plan before preparing plans.
 
   (b)   All streets in the development shall be provided with water mains,
valve boxes, and fire hydrants. All single-family residential developments
shall be provided with house services and meter boxes.  Curb boxes, meter
boxes, and valve boxes shall be installed at finished grade and in accordance
with City standard drawings.
 
   (c)   All water mains shall be sized a minimum of eight inches in diameter
as well as to meet usage and fire flow demands unless otherwise specified as
follows:
      (1)   Lines may be required to be larger than eight inch if identified in
the City's master water or facilities plan.  Lines may also be required to be
larger if an identified need can be documented based on flow or pressure
deficiencies or if the City desires to enter into an oversize agreement.
      (2)   If a line segment is to be installed that completes a loop, grid,
or extends lines of uniform size and no current deficiencies for pressure or
flow can be identified, a like diameter pipe size will be installed.
      (3)   Should it be determined by the Service Department that inadequate
cycling of the water would occur, thus resulting in nonconformance with water
quality standards and regulations, alternative line sizing and connection
configurations will be identified by the Service Director or designee.  The
Service Director or designee shall cooperate with the fire official in
determining the main size to ensure adequate fire flow demands.
      (4)   Waterlines in one- and two-family residential subdivisions may be
six-inch diameter if interconnected and looped in segments unless a segment of
a main functions as a transmission or supply main through the subdivision.
 
   (d)   All water mains and water services shall have a minimum of 48 inches
of cover.
 
   (e)   All water distribution systems in a subdivision shall be designed with
looping for proper water flow.  Dead end lines shall be approved by the Service
Director or designee, after consultation with the fire official, only if the
developer can show no feasible means to loop the lines.
   (f)   Fire hydrants shall be installed as designated by the City's Fire
Division based on the following guidelines:
      (1)   Installed along public and/or private water mains at distances no
greater than 400 feet apart, as measured along the main, except in areas of
one- and two-family residential buildings.  Such distances shall be no greater
than 500 feet.  All fire hydrants shall be placed on lot lines.
      (2)   Installed at the end of six-inch lines or greater.
      (3)   Installed at street corners ten foot from end of radius.
      (4)   Installed as required for maintenance and operational purposes.
      (5)   All cul-de-sacs shall have a fire hydrant at the end for fire flow
demands.
   (g)   All water main plans shall be submitted to the Environmental
Protection Agency for review.  The developer shall prepare all forms and pay
all fees necessary for submission of the plans to the Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95; Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-18-00; Ord. 19-289.
Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.07  STREET LIGHTS.
   (a)   A street lighting plan shall be submitted with final construction
drawings for any development.  The lighting plan may be a separate drawing, or
the proposed layout may be shown on the overall plan drawing.
      (1)   Street lighting shall be provided on all public roadways in the
development.
      (2)   Lighting shall be installed to provide for the following lighting
levels.
         (A)   Major and Secondary:  1.0 minimum maintained foot-candles.
         (B)   Collector Streets:  0.6 minimum maintained foot-candles.
         (C)   Local Streets:  0.35 minimum maintained foot-candles.
      (3)   All lighting plans must be designed and/or approved by the public
utility which shall provide power to illuminate and maintain the luminaire, who
will assume ownership of the street lighting system after construction.
      (4)   The standard lighting unit and support is equivalent to the
luminaire manufactured by Holophane Co., a Division of Johns-Manville, mounted
on a round tapered post, painted black.  Detailed specifications are available
from the public utility.
      (5)   Approval of the lighting layout must be secured from the Service
Department prior to installation and after approval of the street lighting
construction plans by the public utility.
         (Ord. 95-387. Passed 12-5-95; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
931.08  GRADING PLANS.
   (a)   A grading plan shall be developed for all proposed developments.
 
   (b)   The grading plan shall show the proposed grading of every lot as well
as the proposed finished floor elevations of buildings.  This may be shown in
one of the following ways:
      (1)   Proposed elevations shown on lot corners with drainage swales shown
where applicable.
      (2)   Proposed contours.
 
   (c)   If the entire lot will not be disturbed, show a work limit line.
 
   (d)   Grading plans shall be one-inch-equals-50-foot scale or less.
(Ord. 95-387.  Passed 12-5-95.)
 
 
 
TITLE FIVE—Other Public Services
Chap.   
955.   Fire Protection Outside City Limits.
Chap.   
959.   Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 955
Fire Protection Outside City Limits
955.01   Contracts: suburban fire protection services.
955.02   Contracts: suburban emergency medical services.
955.03   Not liable for damages.
955.04   Deposit of money, bonds, or insurance policy.
955.05   Charge for fire service.
955.06   Determining time of service.
955.07   Liability when contracting party a governmental unit.
955.08   Extension of Fire Division services to other subdivisions.
955.09   Charge for emergency medical service.
955.10   City to judge equipment it can furnish.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Fire protection contracts—see Ohio R.C. 9.60
955.01  CONTRACTS: SUBURBAN FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES.
   For the purpose of enabling a person or persons, groups of persons, firm or
corporation owning property outside the territorial limits of the City but
within the territorial limits of the County, to secure stand-by or additional
fire protection for such property, the City Manager, as Director of Public
Safety, is herewith authorized and directed from time to time to enter into a
contract or contracts for a period not to exceed three years from the date of
any contract or contracts with any person, group of persons, firm or
corporation desiring such service, all of which contracts shall include the
following terms and conditions, which covenants, terms and conditions shall not
be superseded or nullified by any other terms and conditions which may be
included therein, and all of such terms shall be a part of every contract
entered into pursuant to the authority herein granted, as follows:
   (a)   As consideration for such contract the person or persons, groups of
persons, firm or corporation applying for such stand-by or additional fire
protection shall pay to the City a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per year for each year the contract is in effect on a premises containing only
a one or two family dwelling and a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
year for each year the contract is in effect on all other premises or renewal
thereof.  However, such contract fee shall not be applicable to any such
agreement between the City and other political subdivision.
   (b)   Each contract shall be terminable upon thirty days' advance notice
given by the City to the person contracting with the City.
      (Ord. 86-755.  Passed 12-16-86.)
 
955.02  CONTRACTS: SUBURBAN EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   For the purpose of enabling a person or persons, groups of persons, firm or
corporation occupying property outside the territorial limits of the City but
within the territorial limits of the County, to secure stand-by or additional
emergency medical services for such property, the City Manager, as Director of
Public Safety, is herewith authorized and directed from time to time to enter
into a contract or contracts for a period not to exceed three years from the
date of any contract or contracts with any such person, group of persons, firm
or corporation desiring such service, all of which contracts shall include the
following terms and conditions, which covenants, terms and conditions shall not
be superseded or nullified by any other terms and conditions which may be
included therein, and all of such terms shall be a part of every contract
entered into pursuant to the authority herein granted, as follows:
   (a)   As a consideration for such contract, the person or persons, groups of
persons, firm or corporation applying for such stand-by or additional emergency
medical services shall pay to the City a fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year for each year the contract is in effect on a premises. 
However, such contract fee shall not be applicable to any such agreement
between the City and any other political subdivision.
   (b)   Each contract shall be terminable upon thirty days' advance notice
given by the City to the person contracting with the City.
      (Ord. 87-47.  Passed 2-3-87.)
 
955.03  NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.
   The City shall in no case be liable for damages for failure to answer any
fire call or emergency medical service call or for lack of speed in answering
any such call or for any inadequacy of equipment, negligent operation of
apparatus, failure to extinguish any fire or for any cause whatsoever, growing
out of contract entered into pursuant to this chapter and use of Fire Division
equipment and personnel in connection with any service proposed to be performed
hereunder.
(Ord. 87-47.  Passed 2-3-87.)
 
955.04  DEPOSIT OF MONEY, BONDS OR INSURANCE POLICY.
   Any such property owner shall deposit with the Director of Finance the sum
of two-hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or U.S. bonds with the
application hereinafter referred to; or shall furnish the City with the
application hereinafter referred to, the certificate of some proper fire
insurance company authorized to do business within the State, wherein it is
agreed that the obligation on the part of such property owner to pay for fire-
fighting service to be rendered, shall, up to not less than three full hours of
service be paid to the City by such company, in the event the City apparatus is
called into service during the period or term of such contract; provided,
however, that the foregoing shall not be required of the State of Ohio or any
county or township of the State.
   In the event the property owner deposits money as herein permitted, the
Director of Finance shall accept the same, give his receipt therefor, and shall
hold the same conditioned on such property owner complying with the terms of
Section
955.05.
   Moneys so received shall be deposited by the Director of Finance in the City
Treasury to the credit of such property owner.  At the termination of the
contract, such moneys so deposited shall be returned to the property owner who
deposited same, after deducting any charges due the City.
(Ord. 82-118.  Passed 3-23-82.)
 
955.05  CHARGE FOR FIRE SERVICE.
   Any owner entering into a contract with the City pursuant to Section
955.01 shall agree to pay to the City the following sums for suburban fire
protection services:
 
Each Paramedic Ambulance $300.00 per hour or fraction thereof
Each Fire Apparatus      $300.00 per hour or fraction thereof
Each Chief Officer       $100.00 per hour or fraction thereof
 
   The decision as to the amount of firefighting apparatus required on any
given fire call shall rest with the Fire Chief.  Such amounts are to be paid
upon vouchers submitted to the owner by the City within forty-five (45) days
after any such call.
(Ord. 06-68.  Passed 2-28-06.)
 
955.06  DETERMINING TIME OF SERVICE.
   The time involved in any fire call or emergency medical service call shall
be determined upon departure of the apparatus from its respective station or
stations in the City, and shall continue until such apparatus has returned to
the quarters.
(Ord. 87-47.  Passed 2-3-87.)
 
955.07  LIABILITY WHEN CONTRACTING PARTY A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT.
   In no event shall the City be liable for damages to any such property owner,
property occupant, nor to the inhabitants at any such township, village or
city, in the event such contracting party is a township, village, or city, for
failure to answer any fire or emergency medical service call, or for lack of
speed in answering any such call, or for any inadequacy of equipment,
incompetent operation of apparatus, failure to extinguish any fire, or for any
cause whatsoever, growing or arising out of any agreement entered into by
virtue of the authority herein granted, or by reason of the use of the fire
equipment, emergency medical service equipment and personnel of the City.
(Ord. 87-47. Passed 2-3-87.)
 
955.08  EXTENSION OF FIRE DIVISION SERVICES TO OTHER SUBDIVISIONS.
   In order to provide fire protection, or to provide additional fire
protection in times of emergency, the services of the Fire Division of the City
may be extended to any other political subdivision of the State, the decision
as to the necessity and feasibility of the extension of such service in
response to a particular call or request therefor to be made by the Chief of
the Fire Division, or, in his absence, by the Assistant Chief or other officer
in charge at the time such call or request is received.
(Ord. 71-203.  Passed 11-2-71.)
955.09  CHARGE FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE.
   Any occupant entering into a contract with the City pursuant to Section
955.02 shall agree to pay to the City the following sums for emergency medical
service rendered:
 
 
Each Paramedic Ambulance $300.00 per hour or fraction thereof
Each Fire Apparatus      $300.00 per hour or fraction thereof
Each Chief Officer       $100.00 per hour or fraction thereof
 
   The decision as to the amount of emergency medical service equipment and
personnel required on any given call shall rest with the Fire Chief.  Such
amounts are to be paid upon vouchers submitted to the occupant by the City
within forty-five (45) days after any such call.
(Ord. 06-68.  Passed 2-28-06.)
 
955.10  CITY TO JUDGE EQUIPMENT IT CAN FURNISH.
   The City shall be the sole judge of the number and type of fire equipment,
the amount of emergency medical service equipment, and of the number of
personnel it can furnish at any fire or emergency medical service call as
provided for herein.
(Ord. 06-68.  Passed 2-28-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 959
Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport
(EDITOR'S NOTE:  The regulations in Sections
959.01 to
959.99 were adopted by Ordinance 99-229, passed July 13, 1999.)
 
959.01   Purpose.
959.02   References.
959.03   Definitions.
959.04   Renting airport space.
959.05   Standards for commercial aeronautical activities.
959.06   Applications format and procedures.
959.07   Minimum requirements.
959.08   Minimum activity requirements.
959.09   Mandatory lease clauses.
959.10   Minimum insurance requirements.
959.11   Specialty commercial aeronautical activities requirements.
959.12   General Fixed Base Operator.
959.13   Other aeronautical-related commercial activities.
959.14   Prohibition.
959.15   Injunction.
959.16   Fuel flowage fees.
959.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Endangering aircraft - see Ohio R.C. 2909.08
Aeronautics - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4561
Airports - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4563
Airports and temporary fields - see OAC Ch. 5501:1-1
Heliports - see OAC Ch. 5501:1-5
959.01  PURPOSE.
   This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the conduct of civil
commercial aeronautical activities at the Springfield-Beckley Municipal
Airport, Ohio.
 
   These standards provide, through the granting of certain privileges, the
minimum activities of general aviation airport services required by the public
of a metropolitan area.  Through the granting of these privileges and
establishment of the requirements, it is felt that the Springfield-Beckley
Municipal Airport will best be able to ensure availability and continuance of
service in a safe and efficient manner.  To conduct an activity at the
Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport, it shall be necessary to meet the
criteria and requirements, as set forth by the City for those activities as
specifically required by these rules and regulations.
 
959.02  REFERENCES.
   The following publications were used in the development of this chapter:
   (a)   Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) Advisory Circular (AC) No. AC150/5190-
1A; Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities on Public
Airports, December 16, 1985.
   (b)   Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) Advisory Circular (AC) No. AC150/5190-
2A; Exclusive Rights at Airports, April 4, 1972.
   (c)   FAA Handbook ASP 5190.6 "Airports Compliance Requirements".
   (d)   Springfield Municipal Airport Master Plan; Phase 2 - July 1980.
      (Ord. 01-299.  Passed 8-21-01.)
 
959.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   (a)   "Standard(s)" means one or more qualifications which may be
established as minimum requirements to be met as a condition for the right to
conduct an activity at the Municipal Airport.
   (b)   "Commercial aeronautical activity" means any aeronautical activity
conducted in or from Airport property which involves the operation, maintenance
or servicing of aircraft where either:
      (1)   The activity is performed for money or other valuable
consideration, or
      (2)   The activity is performed by a for profit corporation, partnership,
company, trust or other legal entity, or
      (3)   The activity is performed on an aircraft not owned or leased by the
performer of the activity.
      Aeronautical activity shall include, but not be limited to all activities
commonly conducted in airports, such as charter operations, pilot training,
aircraft rental and sightseeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, flying
clubs, aerial advertising and surveying, air carrier operations, aircraft
sales, aircraft maintenance (which term includes aircraft inspections which
must be performed by a FAA licensed inspector and made pursuant to applicable
Federal Aviation Regulations), sale of aircraft fuels and consumables, and the
servicing/installation of aircraft components.  However, the following are
activities which by themselves do not constitute aeronautical activities: 
professional services where any aircraft operation is only incidental to the
service (FAA medical examination, engineering activities involving airport
siting and zoning, and legal services involving aircraft operation), food
preparation and sales (including catering for in-flight meals) and sales of
aeronautical accessories either by mail or over-the-counter (installation of
these accessories may be an aeronautical activity).
   (c)   "Airport" and "Municipal Airport" mean the Springfield-Beckley
Municipal Airport, Ohio.
   (d)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (e)   "Board" means the Springfield Municipal Airport Advisory Board.
   (f)   "Commission" means the Springfield City Commission.
   (g)   "Division  of Aviation" means the division  within the City government
established by public law to manage the aeronautical activities of the
Municipal Airport.
   (h)   "Airport Manager" means the person appointed by the City's City
Manager to be the Manager of the Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport.
   (i)   "Airport layout plan" means the currently approved, scaled dimensional
layout of the entire Airport properties, indicating current and proposed usage
for each identifiable segment as approved by the Commission and amended from
time to time.
   (j)   "Person" means any person, firm, general or limited partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, trust or association making application
for, leasing or using any land or facility at the Airport.
   (k)   "General Fixed Base Operator" (GFBO) means a person, firm or
corporation subject to the provisions of a lease and a nonexclusive license
engaging in:
      (1)   three or more specialty commercial aeronautical activities; or
      (2)   two or more specialty commercial aeronautical activities with fuel
dispensing operations.
   (l)   "Specialty Fixed Base Operator" (SFBO) means a person, firm or
corporation subject to the provisions of a lease and a nonexclusive license
engaging in two or  fewer specialty commercial aeronautical activities.
   (m)   "Specialty commercial aeronautical activities" means those activities
identified in these regulations as being activities which may be used to
receive credit for designation as a General Fixed Base Operator.
   (n)   "Other aeronautical related commercial activities" means a person,
firm or corporation subject to the provisions of a  nonexclusive license
engaging in commercial activities which do not by themselves constitute an
aeronautical activity but may support aeronautical activities; however, the
term does not include pilot examinations performed by a pilot examiner who is
certified pursuant to Federal Aviation Regulations and who does not occupy
facilities located on the Airport, such services being unregulated by this
Chapter.
   (o)   "Commercial operator" means a person who provides for compensation or
hire goods or services to others in or from the Airport.
   (p)   "Fuel dispensing operations" means dispensing fuel for sale, either
directly or indirectly, to the public, as distinguished from dispensing fuel
exclusively for use in a fixed base operator's owned or leased aircraft or
vehicles.
      (Ord. 01-299.  Passed 8-21-01.)
 
959.04  RENTING AIRPORT SPACE.
   Any person engaged in aviation activities at the Municipal Airport who
leases or rents from the City either an aircraft tiedown space or an aircraft
hangar space solely for the storage of his/her aircraft is prohibited from
conducting any commercial aeronautical activity and/or other aeronautical
related commercial activity from the space leased or rented unless he/she is in
compliance with these standards.
 
959.05  STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES.
   The City has established standards for commercial aeronautical  activities
at the Airport.  The following space requirements are to be used in determining
the space needs for the activities listed below:
   (a)   Office:  Not less than fifty square feet per employee.
   (b)   Public restrooms:  In conformance with applicable building code.
   (c)   Off-street parking:  1.5 parking spaces per employee.
   (d)   Briefing and/or classroom:  Not less than 124 square feet.
   (e)   Lobby area:  Not less than 124 square feet.
   (f)   Aircraft storage:  Sized for aircraft submitted in the proposal.
   (g)   Aircraft maintenance and/or repair area:  Not less than 4,800 square
feet with the repair/maintenance area having an interior clear span height of
not less than seventeen feet except for structures existing on or before July
1, 1982.
   The requirements for items (a) to (e) above shall be in addition to the
space requirements for aircraft storage and/or the maintenance and/or repair
area.
   Any detached occupied building constructed shall contain not less than 1,000
square feet.
   All structures shall be designed and built as permanent structures.
   All plans for the improvements of land and buildings shall be submitted with
the certification of either a registered architect and/or registered engineer.
   The City shall be solely responsible to determine if the site improvements
conform to the standards set forth in these regulations.
   In the event two or more activities require the same space needs (e.g.,
restrooms) the City may allow the space to be combined to meet each activity's
space requirements.     If the applicant wishes to do this, the application
shall reflect this combined space approach.
   Fuel dispensing operations may only be engaged in by a GFBO.
(Ord. 01-299.  Passed 8-21-01.)
 
959.06  APPLICATIONS FORMAT AND PROCEDURES.
   Applications for leases of ground and/or facilities in the Airport, or for
permission to carry on any commercial aeronautical activity or any other
aeronautical related commercial activity in the Airport, with the necessary
permits and licenses, shall be filed with the Airport Manager  in writing along
with an application processing fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00).  The
applicant shall submit all information and material necessary, or requested, to
establish to the satisfaction of the City that the applicant will qualify and
will comply with these rules and regulations.  The application shall be signed
and submitted by a party authorized to sign for the business.  A listing of
names, including all interested parties, shall be submitted with the
application.
   (a)   Minimum Application Information/Format.  The City shall not accept or
take action on a request until after the interested party submits, in writing,
a proposal which sets forth the scope of the proposed operation(s).  The
application shall include:
      (1)   The legal name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   The proposed land use, facility and/or activity.
      (3)   The names and qualifications of the personnel to be involved in
conducting such activity.
      (4)   The financial responsibility and ability of the applicant and
operator to perform and provide the activity sought for a minimum of three
months.
      (5)   The tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to
be furnished in connection with such activity.
      (6)   The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and
the term of conducting the same.
      (7)   The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished,
the proposed specifications for the same and the means or method of financing
such.
      (8)   The specific types and amounts of insurance proposed in accordance
with minimum requirements for the activity.
      (9)   Names and a financial statement of proposed guarantors of the
lease.
      (10)   Submission of a pro forma operating statement for first year.
   (b)   Supporting Documents.  The applicant shall submit the listed
supportive documents to the Airport Manager. Other documents and information
may be requested by the Airport Manager.
      (1)   Financial statement:  A current financial statement certified or
prepared by a certified public accountant.
      (2)   Assets:  A written listing of the assets owned or proposed to be
purchased which will be used in the business in the airport.
      (3)   Credit report:  A current credit report covering all areas in which
the applicant has done business up to the past ten years.
      (4)   Authorization for release of information:  A written authorization
for the FAA and CAB and all aviation or aeronautic commissions, administrators
or departments of all states in which the applicant has engaged in aviation
business to supply the Airport Manager  with all information in their files
relating to the applicant or his operation.  The applicant shall execute such
forms, releases and discharges as may be requested by any of these agencies.
      (5)   Aircraft:  Copies of aircraft registration(s) and/or lease
agreement(s) showing the type and number of aircraft to be used by the
applicant in his/her proposed activities.
   (c)   Action by City Manager.  The City Manager  shall convene a committee
comprised of the Airport Manager, the Chairman of the Airport Advisory Board, a
city attorney and such other persons as the City Manager deems advisable to
consider the application, negotiate the terms of a lease and/or license and
thereafter make a recommendation to the City Manager. 
   (d)   The City may lease any Airport property now or hereafter owned by the
City on such terms and conditions as the City may prescribe by negotiation,
public auction or sealed bids.  All leases made pursuant to public auction or
sealed bids shall be made to a responsible bidder at the highest and best
rental bid, in accordance with normal bid procedures.
   (e)   The City shall be the sole authority in determining the financial
capability and capacity of persons proposing activities on the Airport.
   (f)   If the City Manager is able to determine that an applicant meets all
requirements and standards pertaining to the type of commercial activity for
which a license is sought, the City Manager shall issue a license to the
applicant; otherwise no license shall issue to the applicant.  Licenses issued
pursuant to this Chapter shall expire on the expiration date of the lease
entered into between the City and the applicant related to the license.  In the
event the City terminates a lease entered into pursuant to this Chapter, the
license related to such terminated lease shall expire at the same time such
lease termination becomes effective.
 
959.07  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall be granted an exclusive right to conduct any commercial
aeronautical activity or any other aeronautical related commercial activity in
the Airport.  No person shall be permitted to use any land or structure to
conduct any commercial aeronautical activity or any other aeronautical related
commercial activity or the solicitation of
business unless in accordance with the standards herein established.
   Prior to the leasing of any space, whether ground or building, and prior to
commencing any operation or business in the Airport, a prospective lessee shall
present evidence satisfactory to the City that the prospective lessee meets the
minimum standards established herein for engaging in such business in the
Airport.  The City, as owner of the Airport, may engage in such activities as
it deems to be appropriate and in its best interest.
   (a)   The lessee shall, prior to exercising the privileges of the lease,
obtain and during the term of his lease, keep current all State, Federal and
local licenses required for each phase of his/her Airport activity and comply
at all times during the term of his/her lease with all Federal, State and local
laws and regulations.
   (b)   Upon execution of the lease agreement, and before the applicant is
given possession of the leasehold, the applicant shall post a performance bond
of eighty percent (80%) of the amount of the total estimated construction cost
of all leasehold capital improvements to be erected by the applicant,
guaranteeing the construction of all such facilities in accordance with the
plans and specifications thereon within the time specified under the lease.  If
such construction or improvements are valued at less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000), no performance bond is required.
   (c)   Before the applicant is given possession of the leasehold, the
applicant shall provide the City with a surety bond in the amount equal to two
months of the annual lease guaranteeing payment of rentals reserved under the
lease.
   (d)   Each lessee is expressly prohibited from conducting any activity at
the Airport other than as provided for by the lease.
   (e)   If the nature of the activity to be conducted by the lessee requires
an environmental impact statement, the lessee, at his/her expense, shall
prepare and submit such a statement to measure the effect of the activity to be
conducted on the ecology of the area which may be impacted.
   (f)   Each activity to be conducted by the lessee shall be conducted and
located in conformity with the Airport Master Plan, Airport Operations Manual
and the Airport Layout Plan, in effect at this time and as may be amended from
time to time.
   (g)   All leasehold improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
detailed construction plans and specifications which shall be submitted to the
Airport Manager  and have approval of the City.  All construction shall meet
the building code requirements of all applicable governing bodies.
   (h)   The prospective lessee shall disclose if the applicant has previously
been held in default of any lease agreement, contract, license or permit
relating to the operation of a business by a court of law or other cognizant
legal authority.
   (i)   The prospective lessee shall have a satisfactory credit rating. 
Refusal to submit necessary information for making a credit appraisal shall
disqualify the applicant from further consideration.
   (j)   The prospective lessee shall demonstrate a current financial net worth
showing that he/she holds unencumbered current assets in a total amount
equaling at least three months' estimated maintenance and operating expenses. 
Applicant shall also demonstrate that he/she has the capital required or
unconditional financial backing sufficient to construct all leasehold
improvements required by these standards and shall unconditionally commit to
such construction within a specified period of time.  If commitments of the
lease are not followed, the City may, at its option, take necessary steps to
foreclose on the performance bond.
   (k)   All structures and improvements hereafter erected or placed on the
leasehold shall require the lessee to obtain the prior written approval thereof
from the FAA.  For approval by the FAA, the lessee shall submit thereto, in
triplicate, "Notice of Construction or Alteration" on FAA Form 7460-1, properly
completed and accompanied by a map or sketch, prepared at a scale large enough
to permit evaluation of the proposed buildings or structures with respect to
airspace utilization and FAA Technical Standard Ord. N-18 and showing the
height and dimensions of such buildings or structures and their relationship to
the Airport.
 
959.08  MINIMUM ACTIVITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Term of Lease.  A ground lease with no leasehold improvements existing
at the time of the lease shall only be for a period of time sufficient for the
lessee to amortize his/her cost of fixed capital improvements such as, but not
limited to, construction of buildings, improvements and paving of parking lots
or tiedown areas.  The term of the lease shall be commensurate with the value
of the leasehold improvement.  If no leasehold improvement is made, the term of
the lease shall be negotiable.
 
   (b)   Condition of Lease.  In all leases where the lessee constructs
improvements or alters existing improvements to the leased premises, including
but not limited to buildings, parking lots, hangars and parking aprons, such
improvements shall become the property of the City at the termination of the
lease unless the City determines that it would not be in its best interest to
own such improvements.  In that event, the lessee shall remove such
improvements within sixty days of the termination of the lease at the lessee's
sole expense.
 
   (c)   City Buy-out of Improvements.  The City, at its option, may purchase
any and all leasehold improvements or alterations to existing improvements to
the leased premises.  The purchase by the City shall be at a negotiated price
and be included in the lease.  Such prices shall be on a pro-rated basis
defined in the lease during the term of the lease.
 
   (d)   General.
      (1)   Building space requirements may be provided in one building,
attached buildings or separate buildings.
      (2)   All applicants and their employees who are required to hold
licenses and permits shall maintain such licenses and permits during the course
of the lease agreement.
      (3)   All persons offering any of the services or combinations thereof
may do so only under written lease or agreement with the Airport owner.
 
   (e)   Rates and Charges.  All leases shall be subject to negotiations with
the City.  Such leases may include but not be limited to the following
financial arrangements:
      (1)   A standard rate:  All lessees may pay to the City a standard rate
which shall be determined by the fair market value of the properties leased by
the City to the lessee and remuneration for ancillary services and privileges
provided by the City to the lease.
      (2)   Percentage rental:  In all leases except leases for nonrevenue
producing commercial activities, the lessee may pay to the City, in addition to
the standard rate, such percentage of the gross revenue of the lessee's
activities conducted at the Airport as is mutually agreed to by both parties.
      (3)   In addition, the City may impose upon the lessee, by lease, such
other charges and fees as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
 
   (f)   The provisions of these minimum standards shall in no way negate or
cause to be null or void existing leases with the Fixed Base Operators and
Airport tenants at the Municipal Airport.  No new leases or renewals shall be
executed with persons at the Airport, nor shall amendments to existing leases
be executed unless they are made subject to the provisions of these minimum
standards.
 
   (g)   Any commercial aeronautical activity not listed under SFBO or GFBO
activities shall be reviewed and approved on its own merit as the occasion or
need arises and shall then be included in these minimum standards.
 
959.09  MANDATORY LEASE CLAUSES.
   (a)   Lessee agrees to operate the premises leased for the use and benefit
of the public:
      (1)   To furnish good, prompt and efficient service, adequate to meet all
the reasonable demands for its service at the Airport.
      (2)   To furnish such service on a fair, equal and nondiscriminatory
basis to all users thereof.
      (3)   To charge fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory prices for each
unit of sale or service, provided that the lessee may be allowed to make
reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of
price reductions.
 
   (b)   The lessee, his/her agents and employees shall not discriminate
against any person or class of persons by reason of race, color, creed, sex,
national origin, or sexual orientation in providing any service or in the use
of any of its facilities provided for the public, in any manner prohibited by
part 152 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.  The lessee further agrees to
comply with such enforcement procedures as the United States might demand that
the lessor take in order to comply with the sponsor's assurances.
 
   (c)   The lessor shall be responsible for the payment of all property taxes
for the areas leased to it.  The lessee shall be responsible for the payment of
all other taxes whether City, State or Federal which arise or may arise as a
result of its operation conducted on the leased premises.
 
   (d)   It is understood and agreed that nothing contained in the lease shall
be construed to grant or authorize the granting of an exclusive right of
service.
(Ord. 18-24. Passed 1-30-18.)
 
959.10  MINIMUM INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   The lessee shall be fully responsible and assume all risks from fire, storms
and accidents to their own employees or the general public and shall take out
and maintain appropriate insurance coverage as agreed to in the lease.  Such
insurance coverage shall be maintained during the term of the lease agreement. 
The City shall be named as an additional insured on each policy and shall be
provided evidence of the existence of stipulated insurance in the form of
copies of insurance policies or certificates of insurance.  The City shall be
given at least thirty days' written notice of policy alterations, cancellations
or deletions.
   The lessor reserves the right to increase or decrease the amount of minimum
coverage required, commensurate with the type and extent of service to be
performed.
   The lessee shall protect the public and the City from any and all lawful
damages, claims or liability caused by its operations at the Airport; and at
its sole cost and expense, provide premises liability in the minimum amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single-limit, bodily injury and
property damage.  In addition, the City may require the lessee to provide
product liability insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000) combined single-limit, bodily injury and property damage.
   Where applicable, the lessee shall be required to provide and keep in force,
during the term of the lease, hangarkeepers liability insurance with the
minimum amount being one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per aircraft for
each occurrence.
 
959.11  SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES.
   The following specialty commercial aeronautical activities that are offered
and/or provided, for compensation, in or from the Airport shall comply with the
requirements set forth below.  These activities are credited to the person in
fulfillment of General Fixed Base Operator requirements.  Any person engaging
in two or fewer of the below listed activities shall be considered a "Specialty
Fixed Base Operator".  If a person engages in three or more of the below listed
activities or two with a fuel dispensing operation, then the person shall
comply with the regulations for a General Fixed Base Operator.
   (a)   Aircraft Sales and/or Aircraft Rental.  Any person wanting to engage
in the sale or lease of new or used aircraft shall lease and/or provide as a
minimum the  following:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space for building
(s), aircraft storage and off-street parking.
      (2)   Building(s).  Lease or construct properly lighted and heated space
for office, lobby area, and public restrooms.
      (3)   Personnel.  One person having a valid FAA pilot certificate with
ratings appropriate for the types of aircraft offered for sale or lease.
      (4)   Services.  Provide for adequate servicing of aircraft and
accessories during warranty periods (new aircraft only).
      (5)   Hours of operation.  The normal operating hours shall be at the
operator's discretion.  However, operator shall be open not less than twenty
hours per week and should be reasonably available to the public.
         (Ord. 01-299.  Passed 8-21-01.)
   (b)   Flight Instruction.  Any person wanting to engage in pilot flight
instruction, including ground school, and/or aircraft rental shall provide as a
minimum the following:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space for building
(s), aircraft storage, and off-street parking.
      (2)   Buildings.  Lease or construct properly lighted and heated space
for classroom and/or briefing room, lobby area, office, and public restroom
facilities.
      (3)   Personnel.  One person holding a valid commercial pilot certificate
with ratings appropriate for the types of aircraft offered for rent.  If flight
instruction is offered, that person should hold a current flight instructor
certificate with ratings appropriate to the type of training offered.
      (4)   Aircraft.  Not less than one properly certificated aircraft owned
or leased in writing to the lessee.  If flight instruction is offered, such
aircraft shall be equipped for flight instruction.
      (5)   Hours of operation.  The normal operating hours shall be at the
operator's discretion, but he/she should be reasonably available to the public.
         (Ord. 01-299.  Passed 8-21-01.)
   (c)   Charter Operations.  Any person wanting to engage in charter
operations shall hold an FAA Air Taxi/Commercial Operator (ATCO) certificate
(issued under FAR Part 135) or an Air Carrier/Commercial Operator certificate
(issued under FAR Parts 121 or 127) with operations specifications covering the
services offered and all certificates required by the Civil Aeronautics Board. 
The following shall be provided at a minimum:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space for building
(s), aircraft storage and off-street parking.
      (2)   Building(s).  Lease or construct properly lighted and heated space
for office, lobby area and public restrooms.
      (3)   Aircraft.  At least one properly certified four-place aircraft or
aircraft with not less than 500 pounds payload capacity owned or leased by the
person.
      (4)   Hours of operation.  Normal operating hours open not less than five
days a week.  Hours of operation for commercial operators are at the lessee's
discretion.
   (d)   Airframe and Powerplant Repair.  Any person wanting to engage in
airframe and power plant repair service shall provide as a minimum the
following:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space for building
(s), aircraft storage and off-street parking.
      (2)   Buildings.  Lease or construct properly lighted and heated space
for aircraft maintenance area, office, lobby area and public restrooms.  The
aircraft maintenance area shall meet State and local industrial code
requirements.
      (3)   Personnel.  Not less than one person currently certified by FAA
with ratings appropriate for work being performed.
      (4)   Equipment.  Sufficient equipment, supplies and availability of
parts to perform maintenance in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations
or equivalent for the work being performed.
      (5)   Hours of operation.  Normal operating hours open not less than five
days a week.
   (e)   Aircraft Accessories Installation and Repair.  Any person wanting to
engage in the installation or repair of aircraft accessories, including
avionics and aircraft instruments, shall provide as a minimum the following:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space for building
(s), and off-street parking.
      (2)   Buildings.  Lease or construct properly lighted and heated space
for work area, office, lobby area, and public restrooms.  The work area shall
meet State and local industrial code requirements.
      (3)   Personnel.  Not less than one person with ratings, licenses and
permits appropriate for work being performed.
      (4)   Equipment.  Sufficient equipment, supplies and availability of
parts to perform maintenance in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations
or the equivalent for the work being performed.
      (5)   Hours of operation.  Normal operating hours open not less than five
days a week.
 
959.12  GENERAL FIXED BASE OPERATOR.
   A General Fixed Base Operator shall be a primary business commercial
operator providing:
   (a)   Three or more of the above SFBO activities; or
   (b)   Two or more of the above SFBO activities plus aircraft fueling
services, who shall be authorized to do business or to provide goods or
services for compensation at the Airport.  If a person offers three or more of
the SFBO activities, the person has the option of engaging in fuel dispensing
operations; provided, the GFBO complies with the requirements contained in
division (d) of this section.
   (c)   Any business wanting to be an GFBO shall meet the minimum requirements
set out below:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold for multiple activities shall contain space to
provide for use area requirements established for the service to be offered
(use spaces need not be additive where combination use can be reasonably and
feasibly established).
      (2)   Building(s).  Lease or construct a building(s) to provide properly
lighted and heated space for office, public lounge, public telephone, briefing
and/or classroom and public restrooms.  All SFBO activities used to meet GFBO
status shall conform to the space and use requirements of the specific SFBO
activity engaged in.
      (3)   Personnel.  The personnel required for each SFBO operation shall be
required.  However, multiple responsibilities may be assigned qualified
personnel to meet these personnel requirements.
      (4)   Aircraft.  All requirements for the specific SFBO activities shall
be met.  Multiple use of aircraft, where appropriate, can be used to meet these
requirements.  However, if aircraft are required for any of the SFBO operations
used to obtain GFBO status, then a minimum of two properly certificated
aircraft shall be owned or under the direct control by lease and based on the
lessee's leasehold.
      (5)   Equipment.  All equipment specifically required for each activity
shall be provided.
      (6)   Services.  All services specifically required for each activity
shall be provided during the hours of operation.
      (7)   Hours of operation.  The hours of operation shall be eight hours a
day, five days a week.
   (d)   If the GFBO proposes to provide fuel dispensing operations, the person
shall provide as a minimum the following services and facilities in addition to
the requirements of the SFBO activities undertaken to obtain GFBO status:
      (1)   Land.  The leasehold shall contain sufficient space to provide for
buildings, aircraft parking area equipped with six tiedowns and aviation
fueling equipment.
      (2)   Personnel.  One properly trained person shall be on duty during
operating hours.
      (3)   Aircraft service equipment.  Shall comply with fueling precautions
and procedures of the Municipal Airport.
      (4)   Flight line services.  The following services shall be provided by
the GFBO at a minimum:
         A.   Fuel, park, and tiedown of aircraft.
         B.   Wash aircraft.
         C.   Inflate tires.
         D.   Sell lubricating oil.
         E.   Sell fuel anti-ice fluid.
         F.   Provide transportation for aircraft occupants from parking ramp
to office.
      (5)   Fueling facilities.  Applicant shall construct or lease two metered
filter-equipped fuel storage tanks for dispensing aviation gasoline and jet
fuel on the Airport premises in areas designated by the Airport Layout Plan. 
The storage tanks shall have a minimum capacity of 8,000 gallons for aviation
gasoline and 10,000 gallons for jet fuel.  If mobile dispensing trucks are
used, each truck shall have a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons for gasoline
and 1,000 gallons for jet fuel.  Separate dispensing pumps and meters for each
grade of fuel is required.
      (6)   Hours of operation.  Fueling service shall be provided seven days
per week, a minimum of twelve hours per day.
      (7)   Fuel commitment.  Persons wanting to fuel aircraft shall
demonstrate that they have a commitment from a fuel supplier to supply all
fuel.  Such commitment shall be in writing from the fuel supplier and shall
specify the types and volumes of fuel available to the applicant.
      (8)   Fuels required.  One of the following aviation gasoline grades
shall be provided:
            100/130 octane avgas
            100 octane low-lead avgas (100 LL)
         One of the following jet fuel grades shall be provided:
            JP-4
            JP-5
            Jet-A
         If fuels other than those required in this section are offered, then
the requirements pertaining to tank capacity need not apply to these additional
fuels.
 
959.13  OTHER AERONAUTICAL RELATED COMMERCIAL  ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   Any person wanting to engage in the other aeronautical  related
commercial activities other than those listed as specialty commercial
aeronautical activities or dispensing of fuel and which support aeronautical
activities shall comply with these requirements listed in this section. 
Activities which fall under this definition may include the following:
      (1)   Banner towing and aerial advertising;
      (2)   Aerial photography or survey;
      (3)   Firefighting or fire patrol;
      (4)   Power line or pipeline patrol;
      (5)   Agricultural aerial applications;
      (6)   Professional services where aeronautical activity is more than
incidental to the services;
      (7)   Aircraft inspections which must be performed by a FAA licensed
inspector and made pursuant to applicable Federal Aviation Regulations.
 
   (b)   These commercial activities shall not be credited toward General Fixed
Base Operator or Specialty Fixed Base Operator status.
 
   (c)   Each applicant wanting to engage in other commercial aeronautical
activities shall make application pursuant to Section
959.06 and provide to the Airport Manager  in writing the following:
      (1)   A full description of the proposed other aeronautical related
commercial  activity;
      (2)   If needed, a copy of any waiver to any FAR's required or used in
the proposed operations;
      (3)   If needed, a copy of any restrictions placed on any aircraft not
certificated in the standard airworthiness category.
 
   (d)   The space and terms of the lease shall be negotiated between the
applicant and the City.  However, it is the City's intent to control commercial
activities in or from the Airport to assure that such activities are in the
best interest of the public.
 
959.14  PROHIBITION.
   No person shall perform commercial aeronautical activities or other
aeronautical related commercial activities on the premises of the Springfield-
Beckley Municipal Airport unless such activities are performed under the
authority of a valid license issued pursuant to Section
959.06 of this Chapter.
 
959.15  INJUNCTION.
   In addition to other remedies which the City may have to enforce this
chapter, the City may also seek a court injunction against continued violation
of this chapter and any order issued pursuant thereto.
 
959.16  FUEL FLOWAGE FEES.
   General Fixed Base Operators and Specialty Fixed Base Operators shall pay to
the City a Fuel Flowage Fee of ten cents (10¢) per gallon on each gallon of
fuel pumped from a fuel tank owned by the City and leased to the General Fixed
Base Operator or the Specialty Fixed Base Operator.  The City Manager may
promulgate regulations specifying times for payment of the Fuel Flowage Fee,
for reporting of fuel flowage by the General Fixed Base Operators and the
Specialty Fixed Base Operators and for audits of such reports.  All fuel
measuring devices used by General Fixed Base Operators and the Specialty Fixed
Base Operators in connection with pumping fuel from a fuel tank owned by the
City and leased to the General Fixed Base Operator or the Specialty Fixed Base
Operator must be certified accurate in compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 08-222, Passed 7-15-08; Ord. 16-282, Passed 10-11-16.)
 
959.99  PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided, whoever violates any provision of this
chapter, or any rule, regulation or order issued thereunder, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
 
 
 
TITLE SIX - Stormwater Regulations
Chap.
961.  Regulations. (Rewritten in its entirety by Ord. 15-87.)
Chap.
963.  Administration. (Repealed by Ord. 15-87.)
Chap.
971.  Floodplain Regulations.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 961
Comprehensive Stormwater Management
961.01   Purpose and scope.
961.02   Definitions.
961.03   Disclaimer.
961.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances, and responsibility.
961.05   Comprehensive stormwater management plan - development plan.
961.06   Prohibitions.
961.07   Comprehensive stormwater management plans - application procedures.
961.08   Compliance with state and federal regulations.
961.09   Comprehensive stormwater management plans - plan content.
961.10   Performance standards.
961.11   Maintenance and final inspection approval.
961.12   Amendments to the comprehensive stormwater management plan.
961.13   Fees.
961.14   Violations.
961.15   Appeals.
 
961.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this regulation is to establish technically feasible
and economically reasonable stormwater management standards to achieve a level
of stormwater quality and quantity control that will minimize damage to
property and degradation of water resources and will promote and maintain the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Springfield.
 
   (b)   This regulation prohibits illicit connections to the stormwater system
and requires owners who develop or redevelop their property within the City of
Springfield to:
      (1)   Control stormwater runoff from their property and ensure that all
stormwater management practices, facilities and improvements are properly
designed, constructed, and maintained.
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts that may be caused by new development
or redevelopment activities.
      (3)   Control the volume, rate, and quality of stormwater runoff
originating from their property so that surface water and ground water are
protected and flooding and erosion potential are not increased.
      (4)   Minimize the need to construct, repair, and replace subsurface
storm drain systems.
      (5)   Preserve natural infiltration and ground water recharge, and
maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water resources, except in
inappropriate soils .
      (6)   Incorporate stormwater quality and quantity controls into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage in the development process.
      (7)   Maximize use of stormwater management practices that serve multiple
beneficial purposes including, but not limited to, flood control, erosion
control, fire protection, water quality protection, recreation, and habitat
preservation. 
      (8)   Design sites to minimize the number of water resource crossings and
the width of associated disturbance in order to minimize future expenses to the
public related to the maintenance and repair of water resource crossings.
      (9)   Maintain, promote, establish and re-establish conditions necessary
for naturally occurring stream processes that assimilate pollutants, attenuate
flood flows, and provide a healthy water resource.
 
   (c)   This regulation shall apply to all parcels used or being developed,
redeveloped or demolished, either wholly or partially, for new or relocated
projects involving highways and roads; subdivisions or larger common plans of
development; industrial, commercial, institutional, or residential projects;
building activities on farms; and redevelopment activities and grading.
 
   (d)   This regulation does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
 
   (e)   This regulation does not require a Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan for linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of impervious surface. 
Such projects must be designed to minimize the number of stream crossings and
the width of disturbance. Linear construction projects must comply with the
requirements of the latest edition of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources
Rainwater and Land Development Manual or other erosion control guideline
approved by the City.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this  Chapter
961, the following terms shall have the meaning herein indicated:
   (a)   “As-built survey” means a survey shown on a plan or drawing prepared
by a Registered Surveyor in Ohio indicating the actual dimensions, elevations,
and locations of any structures, underground utilities, swales, detention
facilities, and sewage treatment facilities after construction has been
completed.
   (b)   “Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan” means the written document
and plans meeting the requirements of Chapter
961 that describes and specifies practices, facilities and improvements to
minimize stormwater runoff from a development area, to safely convey or
temporarily store and release post-development runoff at a rate that minimizes
flooding and stream bank erosion, and protects or improves stormwater quality
and stream channels.
   (c)   “Development area” means a parcel or contiguous parcels in a common
ownership and operated as one development unit, and which is the site of
construction or alteration activities that changes runoff characteristics.
   (d)   “Development drainage area” means a combination of each hydraulically
unique watershed with individual outlet points on the development area.
   (e)   “Drainage” means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by surface or subsurface drains.
   (f)   “Erosion” means the process by which the land surface is worn away by
the action of wind, water or other liquid, ice, gravity, or any combination of
those forces. 
   (g)   “Final stabilization” means all soil disturbing activities at the site
have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of
at least 80% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent
stabilization practices, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been
employed.
   (h)   “Grading” means the process in which the topography of the land is
altered to a new slope.
   (i)   “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the Stormwater System not
composed entirely of stormwater except the following: water line flushing,
landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters,
uncontaminated ground water infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(b)(20)],
uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources,
foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs,
water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual car
washing, charity car wash events, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, street wash water, home sewer treatment
systems that discharge in accordance with Clark County Combined Health District
Codes and permits, and discharges or flows from fire fighting activities. 
   (j)   “Impervious surface” means any surface meeting the definition of
impervious surface in Chapter
918.02 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (k)   “Infiltration” means a stormwater management practice that reduces
discharge during the precipitation event, requiring collected runoff to either
infiltrate into the groundwater and/or be consumed by evapotranspiration,
thereby retaining stormwater pollutants in the facility.
   (l)   “Large common plat of development” means a contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules under one plan.
   (m)   “NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. A
regulatory program in the Federal Clean Water Act that prohibits the discharge
of pollutants into surface waters of the United States without a permit.
   (n)   “Post-development” means the conditions that exist following the
completion of soil disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land
use, and the rate, volume, quality, or direction of stormwater runoff.
   (o)   “Predevelopment” means the conditions that exist prior to the
initiation of soil disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land
use, and the rate, volume, quality, or direction of stormwater runoff.
   (p)   “Professional Engineer” means a professional engineer registered in
the State of Ohio.
   (q)   “Redevelopment” means a construction project on land where impervious
surface has previously been developed and where the new land use will not
increase the runoff coefficient.  If the new land use will increase the runoff
coefficient, then the project is considered to be a new development project
rather than a redevelopment project. 
   (r)   “Runoff” means the portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation
water that flows across the ground surface and is eventually returned to water
resources.
   (s)   “Sediment” means the soils or other surface materials that can be
transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a
product of erosion.
   (t)   “Site owner” or “property owner” means any individual, corporation,
firm, trust, commission, board, public or private partnership, joint venture,
agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state
agency, the federal government, other legal entity, or an agent thereof that is
responsible for the overall construction site.
   (u)   “Soil disturbing activity” means clearing, grading, excavating,
filling, or other alteration of the  earth’s surface where natural or human
made ground cover is destroyed and that may result in, or  contribute to,
increased stormwater quantity and/or decreased stormwater quality.
   (v)   “Stormwater management facility” means a structural or non structual
device, basin, infiltration cell, or other system approved by the City of
Springfield to collect, convey, and/or manage surface runoff.
   (w)   “Stormwater system” means the City’s system or network of storm and
surface water management facilities as defined in Chapter
918 of these codified ordinances.
   (x)   “Water resource” means any public or private body of water; including
wetlands; the area within the ordinary high water level of lakes and ponds; as
well as the area within the ordinary high water level of any ditch, brook,
creek, river, or stream having a defined bed and bank (either natural or
artificial) which confines and conducts continuous or intermittent flow.
   (y)   “Watershed” means the total drainage area contributing stormwater
runoff to a single point.
   (z)   “Wetland” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas (See 40 CFR 232.2, as amended).
 
961.03  DISCLAIMER.
   (a)   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve
any person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by
law. The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or any particular parcel of property.
 
   (b)   By approving a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan under this
regulation, the City of Springfield does not accept responsibility for the
design, installation, and operation and maintenance of stormwater management
practices, facilities and improvements.
 
961.04  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES, AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
 
   (b)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
 
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
 
   (d)   Failure of the City of Springfield to observe or recognize hazardous
or unsightly conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve
the site owner from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting
therefrom, and shall not result in the City of Springfield, its officers,
employees, or agents being responsible for any condition or damage resulting
therefrom.
961.05  COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS - PLAN DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   This regulation requires that a Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan be developed and implemented according to the requirements set forth in
the most recent version of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency's General
Permit Authorization for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction
Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System:
      (1)   for soil disturbing activities disturbing one or more acres of
total land or less than one (1) acre if the disturbing activities are part of a
larger common plan of development or redevelopment disturbing one or more acres
of total land
      (2)   for soil disturbing activities disturbing less than one (1) acre of
land when the City determines that development and implementation of a
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan is necessary to serve the purposes of
this Chapter, and
      (3)   for soil disturbing activities which are part of any regulated
activity described in Section
961.01(c).  The City may require the development and implementation of a
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan for soil disturbing activities
disturbing less than one acres of land and which are not part of a larger
common plan of development, when necessary to accomplish the purposes described
in Section
961.01.
   (b)   The City of Springfield through the Service Department shall
administer this regulation, shall be responsible for determination of
compliance with this regulation, and shall issue notices and orders as may be
necessary. 
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
961.06  PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
illicit discharge to the stormwater system.
 
   (b)   No person or entity shall engage in non-agricultural, earth-disturbing
activities performed on lands located within the City of Springfield's
corporate boundaries, and which are lands not subject to the jurisdiction of a
state or federal governmental agency which regulates the matters governed by
this Chapter, when a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan is required to be
developed and implemented under Section
961.05 of this Chapter; unless a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan has
been submitted to and approved by the Service Director or designee for the non-
agricultural, earth-disturbing activities.
   (c)   No person or entity shall engage in non-agricultural, earth-disturbing
activities or install stormwater management facilities or improvements which
are inconsistent with the applicable approved Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan.
   (d)   No person or entity shall engage in stormwater management practices
which are inconsistent with the applicable approved Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.07  COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS - APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Pre-Application Meeting. Applicants for permissions granted under the
Chapter
961 are encouraged to meet with the Service Director or designee to discuss the
proposed project, review the requirements of this and other pertinent
regulations, identify unique aspects of the project that must be addressed
during the review process, and establish a preliminary review and approval
schedule in advance of tendering an application to the City.
   (b)   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The applicant shall submit
one (1) set of a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan and supporting
documents to the City in conjunction with the submittal of the final plat,
improvement plans, or application for a building, off street parking, or
demolition permit for the site.  The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan
shall meet the requirements of Section
961.09 and must be approved by the City Engineer before the applicant performs
soil disturbing activities.
   (c)   Review and Comment. The Service Director or designee shall review the
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan submitted, and shall either approve
the plan or return the plan with comments and recommendations for revisions. 
   (d)   Approval Necessary. No person shall begin land clearing and/or soil-
disturbing activities unless the City has approved the related Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Plan.
   (e)   Valid for One Year. Approvals issued in accordance with this
regulation shall  be void  one (1) year from the date of approval unless soil
disturbing activities have commenced.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.08  COMPLIANCE WTH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from other federal, state, and/or county agencies and other public
entities having regulatory jurisdiction.  Applicants may be required to show
compliance with all applicable regulatory requirements.
 
961.09  COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS - PLAN CONTENT.
   (a)   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan Required.  The applicant
shall develop a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan describing how the
quantity and quality of stormwater will be managed during and after
construction is complete.  The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall
be prepared by a Professional Engineer and shall include supporting
calculations, plan sheets and design details.  The Plan will illustrate the
type, location, and dimensions of every stormwater management practice
incorporated into the site design.  The chosen  stormwater management
practices, facilities and improvements must address runoff within the site as
well as flooding that may be caused by the development upstream and downstream
of the site. The chosen stormwater management practices, facilities and
improvements must also minimize impacts to the physical, chemical, and
biological characteristics of on-site and downstream water resources and avoid
predictable degradation of water resources.
 
   (b)   Contents of Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall meet the requirements of the
latest edition of Ohio EPA's General Permit Authorization For Stormwater
Discharges Associated With Construction Activity Under The National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System and shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Plans must include the following notes:
         A.   At the end of construction, all stormwater pipes, basins,
channels, etc. shall be cleaned out of all sediment accumulation and restored
to the original design as shown per these plans.
         B.   Forty-eight hours prior to any earth disturbance work, the
Contractor shall notify the City of Springfield, Service Department.
         C.   All mud/dirt tracked onto roads from the site, due to
construction, shall be promptly removed at the end of each day.
         D.   No construction shall commence until all City of Springfield
permits and connection fees have been issued as required.
         E.   Stormwater control facilities composed of straw are not
permitted.
         F.   Clearing, grading, and equipment storage is prohibited within
twenty-five (25) feet of all water resources unless otherwise approved by the
Service Director or desginee.
         G.   Where construction activity is necessary within ten (10) feet of
a water resources high water mark, perimeter protection using Filtrexx erosion
control socks or similar material shall be used.
         H.   Construction projects scheduled to last six (6) months or more
shall not use silt fence as perimeter protection; instead, Filltrexx erosion
control sock or similar material shall be used.
         I.   Dewatering discharges shall not be directed into the City of
Springfield's stormwater system without the prior approval of the Service
Director or designee.
      (2)   Location of all existing easements, covenants and restrictions
impacting each stormwater management practice, facility, or improvement.
      (3)   An Inspection and Maintenance Plan designed to ensure that all
pipes and channels built to convey stormwater to the stormwater control
facility, as well as all structures, improvements, and vegetation provided to
control the quantity and quality of the stormwater discharged from the facility
serves its designed purpose through its expected period of use shall be
submitted as a stand-alone document for review and approval by the Service
Director or designee during the Plan approval process.  At a minimum, the
Inspection and Maintenance Plan shall include a method and frequency for the
following activities:
         A.   Inspection of all permanent structures,
         B.   Debris/clogging control through appropriate removal and disposal,
         C.   Vegetation control (mowing, harvesting, eradication of
undesirable plants),
         D.   Erosion repair,
         E.   Non-routine maintenance should include pollutant and sediment
removal and the "rejuvenation" or replacement of filters and appropriate soils,
and
         F.   Disposal of collected pollutants, sediments, and filter media in
accordance with local, state, and federal regulations.
         G.   Inspection and Maintenance Plans shall include language affirming
the following:
            (i)   The City of Springfield has the authority and right to enter
upon the development area to conduct inspections as necessary to verify that
the stormwater management practices are being maintained and operated in
accordance with this regulation.
            (ii)   Notice that the City of Springfield maintains public records
of the results of site inspections for the period of time specified in the City
of Springfield's record retention schedule, shall inform the site owner(s) or
organization responsible for maintenance (by written notice served on the tax
mailing address for the subject land) of the inspection results, and shall
specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater
practices into proper working condition.
            (iii)   If the City of Springfield notifies the site owner(s), or
other entity responsible for maintenance, of maintenance deficiencies that
require correction, the specific corrective actions shall be taken within
thirty (30 days of the service of the notice; unless the City grants an
extension of time to complete correcting deficiencies due to the impracticality
of completing the correction of deficiencies within thirty (30) days.
            (iv)   Maintenance deficiencies not corrected within thirty (30)
days may be declared a public nuisance in accordance with Chapter
1323 of these codified ordinances.
            (v)   The method of funding long-term maintenance and inspections
of all stormwater management practices, facilities and improvements.
      (4)   Calculations required.  The applicant shall submit calculations for
projected stormwater runoff flows, volumes, and timing into and through all
stormwater management facilities for flood control, channel protection, water
quality, and the condition of the habitat, stability, and incision of each
water resource and its the floodplain, as required in Section
961.10 of this regulation.  These submittals shall be completed for both pre-
and post-development land use conditions and shall include the underlying
assumptions and hydrologic and hydraulic methods and parameters used for these
calculations. The applicant shall also include critical storm [See Section
961.10(c)] determination and demonstrate that the runoff from upper watershed
areas have been considered in the calculations.  Redevelopment projects shall
only submit calculations at the request of the City. 
      (5)   The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall include a time
schedule for completing all elements of the work to construct Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Plan facilities and achieve final stabilization.
      (6)    Detention exemption. When the total detention required on a
development area is under 1,000 cubic feet, the City may, upon the request of
the developer, waive the detention requirements of this chapter; provided,
however that the City shall not grant a waiver if it is determined that storm
water drainage would be a threat to adjacent properties if no detention were to
be provided or if it is determined that the public sewer system downstream of
the development area is not adequate to handle the increased storm flow.
         A.   Residential development of three units or less that are not part
of a larger common plan of development or redevelopment are exempt from the
detention requirements of this chapter; provided, however that the City shall
not determine that storm water drainage would be a threat to adjacent
properties if no detention were to be provided or if it is determined that the
public sewer system downstream of the development area is not adequate to
handle the increased storm flow.
      (7)   The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall conform to the
performance standards specified in Section 961.10.
         (Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.10  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General.  Each Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall include
stormwater management facilities for storage, treatment and control, and
conveyance; shall be designed to prevent structure flooding during a 100-year,
24-hour storm event; shall maintain predevelopment flow rates and discharge
volumes; and shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Exemption. The site where soil-disturbing activities are conducted
shall be exempt from the requirements of Section
 961.10 if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the City that the site is
part of a larger common plan of development where the stormwater management
requirements for the site are provided by an existing stormwater management
practice, facility or improvement.
      (2)   Maintenance. All stormwater management facilities shall be
maintained in accordance with the approved Inspection and Maintenance Plans
prepared pursuant to Section
961.09. All stormwater management facilities whether mandated by this ordinance
or not shall maintain their facility in accordance with standard best practices
or may be declared a public nuisance as described in Section
961.08 of these codified ordinances. 
      (3)   Velocity dissipation. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed
at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall to provide non-
erosive flow velocity from the structure to a water resource so that the
natural physical and biological characteristics and functions of the water
resource are maintained and protected. 
 
   (b)   Stormwater Quality Control.
      (1)   Criteria applying to all stormwater management facilities.  Each
facility shall be designed to facilitate sediment removal, vegetation
management, debris control, and other maintenance activities defined in the
Inspection and Maintenance Plan for the site. Approved practices are listed in
the Ohio DNR Rainwater and Land Development Manual (Third Edition, 2006). The
City may approve other proposed facilities if the applicant can demonstrate to
the City's satisfaction that these facilities meet the objectives of this
regulation.
      (2)   Additional criteria applying to infiltration facilities.
         A.   All runoff directed into an infiltration basin must first flow
through a pretreatment facility as described in the Ohio DNR Rainwater and Land
Development Manual, (Third Edition, 2006).
         B.   Pursuant to Chapter
1153 of these Codified Ordinances, a site owner required to provide off street
parking can receive a reduction of required parking spaces for the use of
stormwater practices described therein.
         C.   The City may require a soil engineering report to be prepared for
the site to demonstrate that a proposed infiltration facility meets these
performance standards.
      (3)   Additional criteria for above-ground stormwater management
facilities.
         A.   A forebay and micropool, as described in the Ohio DNR Rainwater
and Land Development Manual, (Third Edition, 2006) shall be a part of all above
ground stormwater management facilities. 
         B.   Above ground  stormwater management facilities shall be designed
to spread stormwater across its floor and promote infiltration and filtering of
pollutants.  Low flow concrete channels are strictly prohibited. 
 
   (c)   Stormwater Quantity Control. The Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan shall describe how the proposed stormwater management practices are
designed to meet the following requirements for stormwater quantity control for
each watershed in the development:
      (1)   The Critical Storm for each specific development drainage area
shall be determined according to the Ohio Stormwater Control Guidebook (ODNR,
1980).
      (2)   Critical Storm calculations shall meet the following standards:
         A.   Calculations shall include the lot coverage assumptions used for
full build out as proposed.
            (i)   Calculations shall be based on the entire contributing
watershed to the development area.
            (ii)   Curve numbers for the pre-development condition may reflect
any curve number from 10 years preceding application. 
      (3)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from the Critical Storm and all
more frequent storms occurring under post-development conditions shall not
exceed the peak discharge rate of runoff from a 1-year, 24-hour storm occurring
on the same development drainage area under pre-development conditions.
      (4)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from storms of less frequent
occurrence (longer return periods) than the Critical Storm, up to the 100-year,
24-hour storm shall have peak runoff discharge rates no greater than the peak
runoff rates from equivalent size storms under pre-development conditions. The
1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storms shall be considered in designing
a facility to meet this requirement.
         (Ord. 19-289.  Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.11  MAINTENANCE AND FINAL INSPECTION APPROVAL
   To receive final inspection and a determination by the City that the
approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan and the requirements of this
regulation have been complied with in performing a construction project, the
following must be completed:
   (a)   All permanent stormwater management facilities must be installed, free
of debris, and made functional per the approved Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan.
   (b)   An as-built survey, sealed, signed and dated by a Professional
Surveyor and a written certification by a Professional Engineer certifying that
permanent stormwater management facilities, as designed and installed, meet the
requirements of the approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall be
delivered to the City.  The as-built survey must provide the location,
dimensions, details, volume, and bearing of such facilities.  In evaluating
this certification, the City may require the submission of a new set of
stormwater calculations if the City determines that the design was altered
materially from the approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan.
      (Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.12  AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   Proposed amendments to an approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan
shall be made to the City within seven (7) working days of the site owner
identifying said need.  The site owner shall provide the City with any
requested calculations, drawings, or other information requested in order to
determine if the proposed amendment satisfies the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
961.13  FEES.
   The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan review and inspection fees are
part of a complete submittal and shall be paid to the City of Springfield at
the issuance of the applicable permit.  The inspection fee is specified in
Chapter
1313.
961.14  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this regulation.
 
961.15  APPEALS.
   A person adversely affected by a final determination or order made under
this Chapter
961 may appeal such determination or order as provided in Ohio Revised Code
Chapter 2506.
 
 
CHAPTER 963
Administration
REPEALED BY ORD. 15-87, PASSED MARCH 31, 2015
 
 
 
CHAPTER 971
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter
971 enacted by Ordinance No. 09-318; passed December 8, 2009
971.01   General provisions.
971.02   Definitions.
971.03   Administration.
971.04   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction.
971.05   Appeals and variances.
971.06   Enforcement.
971.99   Violations and Penalties.
971.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Purpose for Adoption and Authorization.  ARTICLE XVIII, Section 3, of
the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt police
power regulations for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens.  The City Commission of The City of Springfield, Ohio, has adopted
these Floodplain regulations to preserve and protect the public health, safety
general welfare and to comply with Federal regulations at 44 CFR §§ 59.22 and
60.3 and requirements of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources imposed under
ORC Chapter 1521, compliance with which is necessary to secure to the citizens
of Springfield, Ohio the benefits of having available flood insurance through
the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s National Flood Insurance Program.
 
   (b)   Findings of Fact.  The City of Springfield has special flood hazard
areas that are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base.  Additionally, structures that are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such
damages and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these Floodplain
Regulations are adopted.
 
   (c)   Statement of Purpose.  It is the purpose of these Floodplain
Regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      (8)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within
and near flood prone areas;
      (9)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
      (10)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;
      (11)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and
      (12)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
 
   (d)   Methods of Reducing Flood Loss.  In order to accomplish its purposes,
these Floodplain Regulations include methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities,
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and,
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
 
   (e)   Lands to Which These Regulations Apply.  These regulations shall apply
to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of
Springfield as identified in the maps adopted in Subsection
971.01(f) including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by
Springfield.
 
   (f)   Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.  For the
purposes of these Floodplain Regulations, the following studies and / or maps
are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Clark County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas and
Flood Insurance Rate Map Clark County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective February 17, 2010.
      (2)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the City of Springfield, as required by Subsection
 971.04(c) Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments.
         (Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
      (3)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and / or studies are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. 
Such maps and/or studies are on file at the Community Development Department,
City Hall, 2nd Floor, 76 East High Street, Springfield, Ohio
 
   (g)   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.  These regulations are not
intended to repeal any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations,
zoning or building codes.  In the event of a conflict between these Floodplain
Regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive regulation shall
govern.
 
   (h)   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of these
Floodplain Regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed to accomplish the purposes of these Floodplain
Regulations; and,
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
the Ohio Constitution, the Springfield City Charter or under state statutes. 
Where a provision of these Floodplain Regulations may be in conflict with a
state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take precedence over
these Floodplain Regulations.
 
   (i)   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.  The degree of flood protection
required by these Floodplain Regulations is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. 
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes.  These regulations do not imply that
land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.  These regulations shall not
create liability on the part of the City of Springfield, any City Commissioner,
officer, member of a City board or employee of the City of Springfield, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on these Floodplain Regulations or any administrative decision made
thereunder.  The City of Springfield retains unto itself, its City
Commissioners, officers, City board members and employees all immunities
provided under ORC Chapter 2744.
 
   (j)   Severability.  Should any section or provision of these Floodplain
Regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole or any
part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
 
971.02  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these Floodplain
Regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these Floodplain Regulations the most reasonable
application.
   (a)   “Accessory Structure” means a structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   (b)   “Appeal” means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these Floodplain Regulations or a request
for a variance.
   (c)   “Base Flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.  The base flood may also be referred to
as the 1% chance annual flood or one-hundred (100) year flood.
   (d)   “Base (100-Year) Flood Elevation” (BFE) means the water surface
elevation of the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, and usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level (MSL). In Zone AO areas,
the base flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number
(from 1 to 3 feet).
   (e)   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
   (f)   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   (g)   “Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor” -- See “Lowest Floor.”
   (h)   “Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management)” means the order issued
by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted
activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special
flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
   (i)   “Federal Emergency Management Agency” (FEMA) means the Federal agency
with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   (j)   “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   (k)   “Flood” or “Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   (l)   “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” (FHBM) means the map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and adopted by the City of Springfield depicting approximate
special flood hazard areas, and which has been adopted by the City of
Springfield.
   (m)   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) an official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   (n)   “Flood Insurance Risk Zones” means zone designations on FHBMs and
FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a
community.  Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   Zone AO:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded):  Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with
contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded):  Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   (o)   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means the official report in which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   (p)   “Flood Protection Elevation” (FPE) means the base flood elevation plus
one [1] foot of freeboard.  In areas where no base flood elevations exist from
any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical
flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
floodplain administrator.
   (q)   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge.  A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height.  In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.  The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and
is usually characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity
flood waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to
high erosion forces.
   (r)   “Freeboard” means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for the purposes of floodplain management.  Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice
jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   (s)   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by City of Springfield’s historic preservation program, which program is
certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (t)   “Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis” means an analysis
performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in
accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to
determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   (u)   “Letter of Map Change” (LOMC) means an official FEMA determination, by
letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA);  A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area.  A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR):  A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. 
One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR):  A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria.  A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.
   (v)   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement) of a structure.  This definition excludes an “enclosure
below the lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance
with the applicable design requirements specified in these Floodplain
Regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor.
   (w)   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  The
term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".  For the
purposes of these Floodplain Regulations, a manufactured home includes
manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in Chapter 3733 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (x)   “Manufactured home park” (as specified in the Ohio Administrative Code
3701-27-01) means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured
homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park.  A tract of
land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but
are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on
the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though three or more
manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the
local government authority.
   (y)   “National Flood Insurance Program” (NFIP) means a Federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from flooding.  This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the Federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   (z)   “New construction” means structures for which the "start of
construction" is commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City
of Springfield Flood Insurance Rate Map, December 4, 1985, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   (aa)   “Person” means any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or any other legal entity, including state and
local governments and agencies.  An agency is further defined in the Ohio
Revised Code Section 111.15 as any governmental entity of the state and
includes, but is not limited to, any board, department, division, commission,
bureau, society, council, institution, state college or university, community
college district, technical college district, or state community college. 
“Agency” does not include the general assembly, the controlling board, the
adjutant general’s department, or any court.
   (bb)   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single
chassis, (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projection, (3) designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck, and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
   (cc)   “Registered Professional Architect” means a person registered to
engage in the practice of architecture under the provisions of sections 4703.01
to 4703.19 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (dd)   “Registered Professional Engineer” means a person registered as a
professional engineer under Chapter 4733 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (ee)   “Registered Professional Surveyor” means a person registered as a
professional surveyor under Chapter 4733 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (ff)   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (also known as “Areas of Special Flood
Hazard”) means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood
Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99.  Special flood hazard areas may
also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal
state or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   (gg)   “Start of construction” means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   (hh)   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   (ii)   “Substantial Damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
   (jj)   “Substantial Improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures, which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
The term does not, however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered “new
construction,”
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit to
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
   (kk)   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the standards of these
Floodplain Regulations consistent with the variance conditions established in
these Floodplain Regulations.
   (ll)   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with these Floodplain Regulations.
971.03  ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.  The City Manager shall
designate a Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement these
Floodplain Regulations.
 
   (b)   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.  The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but
are not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas.
      (2)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these Floodplain Regulations have been met, or refuse to issue
the same in the event of noncompliance.
      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these Floodplain Regulations have been committed.
      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these Floodplain Regulations including
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of
issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas,
determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard
areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation
certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for
violations of these Floodplain Regulations.
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these Floodplain Regulations.
      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these Floodplain
Regulations.
 
   (c)   Floodplain Development Permits.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to begin construction or other development activity including but not limited
to filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any
structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or
in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in
Subsection
971.01(f), until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator.  Such floodplain development permit shall show that
the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these
Floodplain Regulations.  No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain
Administrator until the requirements of these Floodplain Regulations have been
met.
 
   (d)   Application Required.  An application for a floodplain development
permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area. 
Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his/her
authorized agent (herein referred to as the “applicant”) prior to the actual
commencement of such construction.  The application shall be made on a form
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator for that purpose.  Where it is
unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the
Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain
development permit to determine the development’s location. Such applications
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these Floodplain Regulations.
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
         A.   Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed
structure as required in Subsection
971.04(e).
         B.   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of
a structure not meeting the design requirements of Subsection
971.04(d)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
         C.   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in Subsection
971.04(i)(3).
         D.   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by Subsection
971.04(i)(2).
         E.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by
Subsection
971.04(i)(1).
         F.   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by Subsection
971.04(c).
      (6)   A floodplain development permit application fee of $25.00.
 
   (e)   Review and Approval of a Floodplain Development Permit Application.
      (1)   Review.
         A.   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these Floodplain Regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit
application shall be reviewed until all information required in Subsection
971.03(d) has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
         B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
      (2)   Approval.  Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application.  If an application is approved, a floodplain development
permit shall be issued.  All floodplain development permits shall be
conditional upon the commencement of work within one (1) year.  A floodplain
development permit shall expire one (1) year after issuance unless the
permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to
completion.
   (f)   Inspections.  The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order
to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
   (g)   Post-Construction Certifications Required.  The following as-built
certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been
issued:
      (1)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data.  For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative.
      (2)   For all development activities subject to the standards of
Subsection
971.03(j)(1), a Letter of Map Revision.
   (h)   Revoking a Floodplain Development Permit.  A floodplain development
permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development
activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted
thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to
the Appeals Board in accordance with Section
971.05 of these Floodplain Regulations.
   (i)   Exemption from Filing a Development Permit.  An application for a
floodplain development permit shall not be required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000.
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code
Section 3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Section 4906 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Section 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 – Floodplain Management.
Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development permit is
also exempt from the standards of these Floodplain Regulations.
   (j)   Map Maintenance Activities.  To meet National Flood Insurance Program
minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to
ensure that City of Springfield flood maps, studies and other data identified
in Subsection
971.01(f) accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
      (1)   Requirement to Submit New Technical Data.
         A.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
            i.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            ii.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed
structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special
flood hazard area;
            iii.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
            iv.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring
the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Subsection
971.04(c).
         B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with Subsection
971.03(j)(1), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and
processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
         C.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter
of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
            i.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
            ii.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations
but no floodway.
         D.   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to Subsection
971.03(j)(1)(A).
      (2)   Right to Submit New Technical Data.  The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details.  Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the City Manager of the
City of Springfield, and may be submitted at any time.
      (3)   Annexation / Detachment.  Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the City
of Springfield have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed
authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area.  In order that the
City of Springfield Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City of
Springfield boundaries, the Floodplain Administrator shall include within such
notification a copy of a map of the City of Springfield suitable for
reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for
which the City of Springfield has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
   (k)   Data Use and Flood Map Interpretation.  The following guidelines shall
apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of
special flood hazard:
      (1)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
      (2)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood
maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and / or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:
         A.   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these Floodplain Regulations.
         B.   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and /or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA.  Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and / or appeal to FEMA.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard.  A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in Section
971.05, Appeals and Variances.
      (5)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and
field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established
high water marks, etc.) shall prevail.
   (l)   Substantial Damage Determinations.  Damages to structures may result
from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc.
After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
Additionally, the City Manager may instruct the Floodplain Administrator to
implement other measures to assist with the substantial damage determination
and subsequent repair process.  These measures include issuing press releases,
public service announcements, and other public information materials related to
the floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures;
coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with
substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures
materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged
structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially
damaged structures with Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims.
971.04  USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
The following use and development standards apply to development wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in Subsections
971.01(f) or
971.03(k)(1):
   (a)   Use Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Uses.  All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by City of Springfield are
allowed provided they meet the provisions of these Floodplain Regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited Uses.
         A.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Section 3701 of the Ohio Revised Code.
         B.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Section 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
   (b)   Water and Wastewater Systems.  The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
 
   (c)   Subdivisions and Large Developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
Floodplain Regulations;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or 5
acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in Subsection
971.03(j)(1)(A)(iv) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by Subsection
971.04(c)(4).
 
   (d)   Residential Structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements of this Subsection
971.04(d) for anchoring and construction materials resistant to flood damage
are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection elevation data are not available, the structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent natural grade.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
         B.   be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of Subsection
971.04(d).
      (8)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall
have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
 
   (e)   Nonresidential Structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
Subsections
971.04(d)(1) through (3) and (5) through (8).
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
Subsections
971.04(e)(2)(A) and (B).
      (3)   Where flood protection elevation data are not available, the
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least
two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade.
 
   (f)   Accessory Structures.  Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of Subsection
971.04(d)(5)(C).
 
   (g)   Recreational Vehicles.  Recreational vehicles must meet at least one
of the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days, or
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of Subsection
971.04(d).
 
   (h)   Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks.  All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
 
   (i)   Assurance of Flood Carrying Capacity.  Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these Floodplain Regulations, the
following additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the
flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in Floodways
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            i.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in Subsection
971.03(j)(1);
            ii.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            iii.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            iv.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            v.   Concurrence of the City Manager of the City of Springfield and
the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed
actions.
      (2)   Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No
Floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than 1.0 (one) foot at any point.  Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or,
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            i.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible;
            ii.   Subsection
971.04(i)(1)(B), items (i) and (iii)-(v).
      (3)   Alterations of a Watercourse.  For the purpose of these Floodplain
Regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks.
The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the
“bankfull stage.”  The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based
on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field
Technique or other applicable publication available from a Federal, State, or
other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a
watercourse, the following standards apply:
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
         B.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with
City of Springfield specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an
agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain
development permit.
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in Subsection
971.03(j)(1)(A)(iii) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the
relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the
placement of culverts.
 
971.05  APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Appeals Board Established.
      (1)   The persons appointed to the City of Springfield Board of Zoning
Appeals shall also serve as the Appeals Board for these Floodplain Regulations.
      (2)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in City Hall
at 76 East High Street Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (b)   Powers and Duties.  The Appeals Board shall:
      (1)   hear and decide appeals of the Floodplain Administrator’s
determinations where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
administration or enforcement of these Floodplain Regulations, and
      (2)   authorize or disapprove variances in accordance with Subsection
971.05(d) of these Floodplain Regulations.
 
   (c)   Appeals.  Any person affected by any notice and order, or other
official action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such
person shall file, within 20 days of the date of such notice and order, or
other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for
the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain
Administrator’s decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator.  Upon receipt of the
appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all
pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made
to the Appeals Board.  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board
shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give notice of the time for
hearing the appeal in writing to parties in interest, and decide the appeal
within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
 
   (d)   Variances.  Any person believing that the use and development
standards of these Floodplain Regulations would result in unnecessary hardship
may file an application for a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power
to authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these
Floodplain Regulations, not inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the
lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these Floodplain
Regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
      (1)   Application for a Variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
         C.   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a
variance application fee set by the following schedule of fees:
 
Commercial and Multi-Family Property              $ 285
One-, Two-, and Three-Family Residential Property $  57
      (2)   Public Hearing for the Appeal.  At the public hearing for the
appeal, the applicant may present the applicant’s material and relevant
evidence and arguments to the Appeals Board.  In considering such variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these Floodplain Regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in unnecessary hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. 
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these Floodplain
Regulations does not constitute an unnecessary hardship to the applicant.
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these Floodplain
Regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense,
nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws.
         D.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
         E.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
Floodplain Regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these
Floodplain Regulations.
      (4)   Other Conditions for Variances.
         A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         B.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in Subsections
971.05(d)(2)(A) to (K) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
         C.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
 
   (e)   Procedure at Hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except for
confidential deliberations of the Appeals Board, but including all documents
presented and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal (or variance request).
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator may present evidence in opposition to
the appeal (or variance request).
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for later appeal to a court.
      (7)   The Appeal Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The Appeals Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a
reasonable time after the hearing.
 
   (f)   Appeal to the Court.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals
Board may appeal such decision to the Clark County Court of Common Pleas, as
provided in Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code.
 
971.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Compliance Required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these Floodplain Regulations and all
other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
these Floodplain Regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a
development permit as stated in Subsection
971.03(i).
      (2)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these Floodplain Regulations and shall be punishable in accordance
with Subsection
971.06(c).
      (3)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these Floodplain Regulations and
punishable in accordance with Subsection
971.06(c).
 
   (b)   Notice of Violation.  Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of these Floodplain
Regulations, he/she shall give notice of such violation to the person
responsible therefore and order compliance with these Floodplain Regulations as
hereinafter provided.  Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these Floodplain Regulations that have been violated, and order remedial
action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these
Floodplain Regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person’s last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
 
971.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
   Violation of the provisions of these Floodplain Regulations or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability
offense, and shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor.  Any person who
violates these Floodplain Regulations or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided
by law.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Springfield from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.  The City of Springfield shall prosecute any violation of these
Floodplain Regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
 
PART ELEVEN - ZONING CODE
 
NOTE:  The 2001 Zoning Code was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 01-236
on June 26, 2001.
 
TITLE ONE - General Provisions
Chap.
1101.   General.
Chap.
1102.   Definitions.
 
TITLE TWO - Uses Permitted by District
Chap.
1105.     A Agricultural District.
Chap.
1106.     RR-1 Rural Residence District.
Chap.
1107.     RS-5 Low Density Single-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1108.     RS-8 Medium Density Single-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1109.     RFBH    Factory-Built Housing Residence District.
Chap.
1111.     RM-12 Low Density Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1112.     RM-20 Medium Density Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1113.   CN-2 Neighborhood Commercial District.
Chap.
1114.     RM-44 High Density Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1115.     RM-44A High Density Multi-Use District.
Chap.
1116.     CO-1 Commercial Office District.
Chap.
1117.     CN-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
Chap.
1118.     CC-2 Community Commercial District.
Chap.
1119.     EC-1 Educational Campus District.
Chap.
1120.     CB-10 Central Business District.
Chap.
1121.     CH-1 Highway Commercial District.
Chap.
1122.     CI-1 Intensive Commercial District.
Chap.
1123.     RDP Research and Development Park District.
Chap.
1124.     M-1 General Manufacturing District.
Chap.
1125.     M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District.
Chap.
1126.     G Green Space, Park, and School District.
Chap.
1127.     OFP Flood Plain Overlay District.
Chap.
1128.     OHP Historic Preservation Overlay District.
Chap.
1129.     OPD-H Planned Development Housing Overlay District.
Chap.
1130.   CC-2A   Shopping Center District.
Chap.
1131.   UCOD Urban Commercial Overlay District.
Chap.
1132.     UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District.
Chap.
1133.     DMC Downtown Medical Campus District.
Chap.
1135.     Requirements for Specific Uses.
Chap.
1136.   Wireless Communication Facilities.
Chap.
1140.   PD Planned Development District.
Chap.
1141.   UPOD Unified Plan Overlay District.
Chap.
1142.   EECPOD Eastern Edge Corridor Plan Overlay District.
 
TITLE FOUR - Principal Use and Structural Requirements
Chap.
1150.     Yard and Area Requirements.
Chap.
1151.     Height Requirements.
 
TITLE FIVE - Accessory Use and Structural Requirements
Chap.
1152.     General Requirements.
Chap.
1153.     Off-Street Parking Requirements.
Chap.
1155.     Sign Requirements.
Chap.
1156.     Fence and Hedge Requirements.
 
TITLE SIX - Supplementary Requirements
Chap.
1158.     Tree Regulations.
Chap.
1161.     Performance Standards.
 
TITLE SEVEN - Nonconformities
Chap.
1171.     Nonconformities.
 
TITLE EIGHT - Board of Zoning Appeals
Chap.
1172.     Board of Zoning Appeals.
 
TITLE NINE - Implementation
Chap.
1173.     Zoning Districts and Map.
Chap.
1174.     Amendments to Code.
Chap.
1175.     Annexation.
Chap.
1176.     Zoning Certificates.
Chap.
1177.     Enforcement and Penalty
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART ELEVEN--ZONING CODE
 
TITLE ONE - General Provisions
Chap.
1101   General.
Chap.
1102   Definitions.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1101
General
 
1101.01   Title.
1101.02   Purpose.
1101.03   General effect on this chapter.
1101.04   Interpretation.
1101.05   Severability.
1101.06   Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
1101.07   Effective date.
1101.08   Temporary emergency recovery uses following a disaster.
1101.09   Exemptions.
 
1101.01  TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Code of the
City of Springfield," except as referred to herein, where it shall be cited as
the "Springfield Zoning Code."
 
1101.02  PURPOSE.
   This ordinance is enacted for the general purpose of promoting the public
health, safety, comfort and welfare of the residents of the City of
Springfield; to protect the property rights of all individuals by assuring the
compatibility of uses and practices within districts; to facilitate the
provision of public utilities and public services; to lessen congestion on
public streets, roads, and highways; to provide for the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance, including the provision of penalties for its
violation; and for any other purpose provided in this ordinance, The City of
Springfield's Charter, the Ohio Revised Code, or under common law rulings.
 
1101.03  GENERAL EFFECT OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, the use of property and
structures shall be in accordance with the minimum standards established in
this code.
   (a)   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limits, the area regulations, yard
regulations, and off-street parking and loading requirements established for
the district in which the structure is located.
   (b)   The yards, parking and loading spaces, or lot area required for one
structure or use under this code may not be used to meet the requirements for
another structure or use.
   (c)   Every use established or structure erected or structurally altered
shall be located on a lot, and the number of uses and structures permitted on a
lot shall be as follows:
      (1)   In the RS districts, there shall not be more than one (1) principal
permitted use or building, or provisional use or building, nor a conditional
use in conjunction with another principal use on a lot.  There may, however, be
more than one (1) conditional use or building and more than one (1) accessory
use or structure on a lot.
      (2)   In all districts except the RS districts, there may be more than
one (1) principal use, building, and accessory use and structure on a lot.
      (3)   Except for open off-street parking, an accessory use or structure
shall not be located on a lot without a principal use to which it is accessory.
   (d)   No use which is permitted as a conditional use under this code shall
be established or enlarged except as permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (e)   No use or structure shall be permitted on a lot that is not
specifically listed as permitted in this code.  If a use or structure is not
listed, the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine where such use or structure
is permitted according to the provisions established in Chapter
1172.
 
1101.04  INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and the general welfare.  Whenever the requirements of
this ordinance conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
 
1101.05  SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of any
phrase, clause or part of this ordinance shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remainder of this ordinance.
 
1101.06  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   Part Eleven of the City's Codified Ordinances in effect on the date
immediately proceeding the effective date of this ordinance as stated in
Section
1101.07 of this Springfield Zoning Code is hereby repealed.  This ordinance
shall not be construed to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against
such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred, or an right accrued or claim arising under the former
ordinance, or in any way whatever affect any such offense or act so committed
or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right
accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that
the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time
of such proceeding, so far a practicable.
 
1101.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall become effective on August 1, 2001, and shall apply to
all applications for building permits, zoning certificates, sign permits,
development permits, certificates of appropriateness, variances, and
conditional use permits filed with the City on and after July 15, 2001, or the
deadline date for the appropriate board meeting, where such board approval is
required.
 
1101.08  TEMPORARY EMERGENCY RECOVERY USES FOLLOWING A DISASTER.
   After an emergency, as that term is defined in Section
1102.02(e)(8) of the Codified Ordinances, has been declared in the City,
temporary emergency recovery uses shall be permitted in all zones described in
Title Two of this Chapter.  No temporary emergency recovery use shall be
commenced until after the Community Development Department has issued a permit
document for the temporary emergency recovery use which shall contain all of
the following:
   (a)   The name and mailing address of the owner of the property on which the
temporary emergency recovery use is to be permitted.
   (b)   The name and mailing address of the applicant for the permit.
   (c)   A description of the use to which the subject property was put
immediately prior to the emergency event resulting in the declaration of an
emergency, as that term is defined in Section
1102.02(e)(8) of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   The time period during which the permit will be valid, and
   (e)   A description of the temporary structure which is permitted.
   The Community Development Director shall issue temporary emergency recovery
use permits in all situations where the proposed use meets the definition of a
temporary emergency recovery use, unless a moratorium has been declared on the
issuance of such permits.
(Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03.)
 
1101.09  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Throughout the duration of any emergency, as that term is defined in
Section
1102.02(e)(8) of the Codified Ordinances, which has been declared in the City,
the provisions of this Zoning Code shall not be applicable to any City of
Springfield temporary police, fire, emergency medical, emergency
communications, or municipal utility facility.
 
   (b)   Throughout the duration of any emergency, as that term is defined in
Section
1102.02(e)(8) of the Codified Ordinances, which has been declared in the City,
the provisions of this Zoning Code shall not be applicable to any temporary
police, fire, emergency medical, emergency communications, or public utility
facility, other than a City of Springfield government facility that the City
Manager finds will aid in the expeditious restoration of good order, safety,
utility services, and preservation of public health and welfare in the area;
provided, however, that this exemption will not create any nonconforming use
status or rights for the temporary facility.  This exemption shall apply to
those uses which the City Manager certifies, in writing, as eligible for this
exemption.
(Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1102
Definitions
 
1102.01   Interpretation of terms and words.
1102.02   Definitions.
 
1102.01  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.
   Words used in this code shall have the meanings as defined below.  Words in
the present tense include the future tense.  The singular number includes the
plural and the plural number includes the singular.  The word "shall" is always
mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.  The words "used" or "occupied"
include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied."
Certain terms or words not defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned
to them as defined in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary.
 
1102.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to this Code unless a contrary
meaning is indicated by the text.
   (a)   (1)   Abandonment.  The voluntary cessation of a use or activity, but
excluding short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of
remodeling, maintenance, improvements, vacation, seasonal closure, active
listing of the property for a change in ownership or leasehold interests, or
other similar interruptions.
      (2)   Abut/abutting.  Contiguous; having a boundary, wall or property
line in common.
      (3)   Access.  The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles
have ingress and egress to a lot, structure or parking area.
      (4)   Accessory apartment.  A dwelling unit located within an owner-
occupied, single-family dwelling.
      (5)   Accessory structure/use.  A structure or use which:
         A.   is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use;
         B.   is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal
building or use served;
         C.   contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or use; and
         D.   is located on the same lot as or across a street, alley or
railroad right-of-way from the principal use.
      (6)   Addition.  Extension of a building or structure or increase in
floor area or height of a building or structure.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
      (7)   Adult arcade, Adult cabaret, Adult motel, Adult motion picture
theater, Adult store and Adult theater. Each term shall each have the meaning
assigned to them by Section
707.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
      (8)   Adult family home.  A residence or facility that provides
accommodations to three (3) to five (5) unrelated adults and supervision,
personal care services to at least three (3) of those adults, and is licensed
according to the provisions of Chapter 3722d of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (9)   Adult group home.  A residence or facility that provides
accommodations to six (6) to 16 unrelated adults, provides supervision and
personal care services to at least three (3) of the unrelated adults, and is
licensed according to the provisions of Chapter 3722 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (9)   Aged.  Any person 62 years of age or older.
      (10)   Agricultural use.  The use of land for growing forages and sod
crops; grains and seed crops; vegetables; trees and forest products; fruits,
including grapes, nuts, and berries; nursery, floral, ornamental, and
greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program.  Agricultural use also is to engage in the keeping,
pasturing, and feeding of livestock for the sale of livestock or livestock
products. An agricultural use is assessed by the County Auditor at "current
agricultural use value."
      (11)   Aisle.  A surface which is connected directly to a parking or
loading space and designed to permit ingress or egress of a vehicle to or from
the parking or loading space.  (In no case can an aisle be a drive--see
definition for a "drive.")
      (12)   Alley.  Any public or private way whose primary function is to
furnish secondary access to the side or rear of a lot having its principal
access to a street.
      (13)   Animal specialty service.  An establishment providing service, not
rising to the level of veterinary medicine, for animals.  Examples would be
grooming services, kennels, and animal training schools.
      (14)   Appraised value.  The value of real property as established by the
County Auditor, or by a higher authority upon appeal, and is the value upon
which the next fiscal year's real estate taxes are based.
      (15)   Automobile and truck-oriented use.  Any principal use intended or
designed to provide a service to occupants while they are within a motor
vehicle such as but not limited to a drive-in financial institution; any
principal use related to the sale, servicing or repair of vehicles such as but
not limited to a car wash, automobile service station, garage, and automobile
accessory sales; commercial parking area (open or enclosed) for vehicles; and
any principal use catering to the convenience of drivers of motor vehicles such
as but not limited to convenience grocery stores of no more than 4,000 square
feet, drive-in restaurants, dry cleaning centers, and photo developing drop
centers.  This definition does not include a truck freight terminal or a solid
waste transfer station.
   (b)   (1)   Balcony.  A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from
the wall of a building, enclosed by a railing, accessible from above grade, and
not attached to the ground.
      (2)   Basement.  That portion of a building which is partially or wholly
below grade A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height and yard
regulations when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
         A.   More than six (6) feet above the established grade;
         B.   More than six (6) feet above the established grade for more than
50 percent of the total building perimeter; or
         C.   More than 12 feet above the established grade at any point.
      (3)   Bed and breakfast inn.  A house or portion thereof where not more
than five (5) short term lodging rooms and meals are provided to guests.  The
operator of the inn lives on the same premises.
      (4)   Boarding house/lodging house.  See "Rooming house."
      (5)   Build.  To construct, assemble, erect, convert, structurally
enlarge, or reconstruct a building or structure.
      (6)   Buildable area.  The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard
requirements of the Zoning Code have been deducted.
      (7)   Building.  A combination of materials to form a structure having a
roof that is safe and stable and designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, or property.  A building
does not include a tent, trailer, trailer coach, or mobile home.  Although one
part of a structure may be separated from another part by a "fire wall," as
defined by the Ohio Basic Building Code, both parts constitute one building as
do structures which are joined together by structural members.
      (8)   Building, attached.  A building attached to another building by a
common wall, such wall being a solid wall with or without windows and doors,
and/or a common roof with a common horizontal dimension of eight (8) feet or
more.
      (9)   Building, detached.  A building which is not connected to another
building.
      (10)   Building area.  The area of a building within its largest outside
dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the first floor level, exclusive
of open porches, breezeways, terraces, and exterior stairways.
      (11)   Building coverage.  The amount of land covered or permitted to be
covered by a building or buildings, usually measured in terms of  percentage of
lot area.
      (12)   Building height.  The vertical distance from the established grade
to the roof line.
      (13)   Building line.  A line which extends across the full extent of a
lot, is parallel to the street, and touches that part of a building closest to
the street.  The building line may or may not be coincident with the front yard
line.
      (14)   Building permit.  Official certification that a proposed building
or structure complies with the provisions of this Code and such other
ordinances as may be applicable.  Such a permit is required for new
construction and for alterations or additions to an existing structure prior to
commencement of construction.
      (15)   Business service establishment.  An establishment primarily
engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract
basis.  Such establishments include but are not limited to the following:
advertising agencies; consumer credit reporting agencies, mercantile reporting
agencies, and adjustment and collection agencies; mailing, reproduction,
commercial art and photography, and stenographic services; services to
dwellings and other buildings; news syndicates; personnel supply services;
computer and data processing services; research and development laboratories;
management, consulting and public relations services; detective agencies and
protective services; equipment rental and leasing services; photo finishing
laboratories; and other establishments primarily engaged in furnishing business
services such as bondsmen, bottle exchanges, drafting service, interior
designing, notary publics, packaging and labeling service, telephone message
service, water softening service, and auctioneering service on a commission or
fee basis (see major group 73 of the Standard Manufacturing Classification
Manual).
   (c)   (1)   Cellar.  See "Basement."
      (2)   Certificate of occupancy.  Official certification that a premises
complies with the provisions of this Code and such other ordinances as may be
applicable.  Such a certificate is granted upon completion of new construction
or for alterations or additions to existing structures.
      (3)   Clinic, animal.
      (4)   Clinic, health services.  An office in which a group of
practitioners and their allied professional assistants are associated for the
care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons.  A
clinic may include a laboratory but not facilities for inpatient care or
operating rooms for major surgery.  See "Hospital."
      (5)   Club.  A meeting place of a nonprofit association or entity for a
social, literary, political, educational, benevolent or recreational purpose
and which is used primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests. 
This definition does not include a group organized solely or primarily to
render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.  This
definition also does not include a fraternity or sorority house, religious
institution, nor an adult business.
      (6)   Commercial recreational uses.  Facilities which are used primarily
for physical exercise or entertainment and which include but are not limited to
campgrounds, courts, gyms, swimming pools, locker and training rooms, target or
shooting ranges, amusement arcades, and billiard halls.  This definition does
not include massage parlors.
      (7)   Communication station.
      (8)   Conditional use.  A principal or accessory use which is allowable
when the provisions are met and when the facts and conditions specified
elsewhere in this Code, as those upon which the exception is permitted, are
found to exist by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (9)   Consignment store.  A retail establishment engaged in selling used
merchandise such as clothing, furniture, books, shoes, or household appliances
on consignment or a retail establishment engaged in selling donated used
merchandise.  In association with such stores, merchandise is brought to the
establishment and processed such as by being marked, cleaned, sorted, and
stored as a major part of the principal use.  Such stores do not include those
selling vehicles, auto parts, scrap, or waste.
      (10)   Conversion.  Any change of one principal use to another principal
use.
      (11)   CEDA Planning Commission.  A regional planning commission
established by exercise of the City Planning Board's powers for a territory
within the corporate boundaries of the City governed by a Cooperative Economic
Development Agreement entered into pursuant to Section 701.07 of the Ohio
revised Code.
         (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
      (12)   City Planning Board.  The City Planning Board of the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
      (13)   Community Center.  A building or group of buildings operated by a
public or nonprofit group or agency and used for recreational, social,
education, or cultural activities.
         (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.) (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
   (d)   (1)   Daycare center.  An establishment in which the operator is
provided with compensation in return for providing individuals with care for
less than 24 hours at a time. This term includes, but is not limited to, a day
nursery, nursery school, adult daycare center, or other supplemental care
facility. Clients may or may not be developmentally disabled but are not
undergoing treatment for alcohol or drug abuse. This term does not include a
Daycare Home Type A or Daycare Home Type B.
         A.   Adult daycare center. Any place that provides daycare for
compensation or daycare for adults funded by a public or private institution;
or any place that is not the residence of the administrator where adult daycare
is provided. An adult daycare center shall not include a convalescent home,
hospital, or any other full-time care facility.
         B.   Child daycare center. Any place that provides daycare for
compensation or daycare for children funded by a public or private institution;
or any place that is not the residence of the licensee or administrator where
child daycare is provided to 7 to 12 children at one time.
            (Ord. 09-93. Passed 4-14-09.)
      (2)   Day-care home, type A.  A state licensed facility in which child
day-care or publicly funded child day-care is provided for seven (7) to 12
children at one time or is provided for four (4) to 12 children at one time if
four (4) or more children at one time are under two (2) years of age.  The
children may or may not be developmentally disabled but are not undergoing
treatment for alcohol or drug abuse.  The facility is the permanent residence
of the person responsible for the daily operation of the facility.  (See
Chapter 5104 of the Ohio Revised Code.)
      (3)   Day-care home, type B.  A facility in which child day-care is
provided for one (1) to six (6) children at one time and in which not more than
three (3) children are under two (2) years of age at one time.  The children
may or may not be developmentally disabled but are not undergoing treatment for
drug abuse.  The facility is the permanent residence of the person who operates
the type B family day- care home.  (See Chapter 5104 of the Ohio Revised Code.)
      (4)   Deck.  An uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a
building, accessible at or from above grade, and attached to the ground.
      (5)   Density.  The number of dwelling units per unit area of land
(usually expressed as dwellings units per acre).
      (6)   Density, gross.  The number of dwelling units per acre of the total
land area to be developed.
      (7)   Density, net.  The number of dwelling units per acre of land when
the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses.
      (8)   Development.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
property, including but not limited to building construction and
reconstruction, extraction, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
drilling operations or the storage of equipment and materials.  Development
does not include activities associated with an agricultural use.
      (9)   Developmentally disabled.  A person certified by a medical doctor
as having a physical or mental impairment which is expected to be of long-
continued and indefinite duration, substantially impedes the ability to live
independently, and is of a nature that the ability to live independently could
be improved by more suitable housing conditions. Such disabilities are
attributable to but not limited to a physical impairment; mental retardation,
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, or another similar neurological condition;
dyslexia resulting from an above disability; or a mental or nervous disorder
which disability originates before such individual attains age 18. 
Developmentally disabled does not include current, illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
      (10)   Discontinuance.  The cessation of a non- conforming use.
      (11)   District.  A portion of the City delineated on the zoning map in
which requirements and development standards for the use of land and buildings
within, above, or below the land are prescribed in this Code.
      (12)   Drive-in.  A business establishment so developed that its retail
or service character is dependent upon providing stacking spaces or parking
spaces for motor vehicles so patrons can be served while in their motor
vehicles rather than in a building or structure.
      (13)   Drive/driveway.  A surface designed to provide vehicular access to
a parking area or to a loading space(s).  A drive or driveway is also the means
for providing access to a garage or off-street parking for single-family
dwellings and duplexes.  A drive, as distinguished from an aisle, usually
provides access to a parking area from another parking area or from a street.
      (14)   Dwelling.  A building which is wholly or partially used or
intended to be used for residential occupancy by a person for 30 or more
consecutive days.  A tent, recreational vehicle, motel, or hotel is not
considered a dwelling.
      (15)   Dwelling, duplex.  A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units.
      (16)   Dwelling, farm.  A dwelling located on a farm and occupied by the
family which maintains and operates, owns or has a leasehold interest in the
farm on which the dwelling is located.
      (17)   Dwelling, high-rise multi-family.  A multi-family dwelling
consisting of three (3) or more stories of dwelling units with a total of four
(4) or more stories located entirely above grade.
      (18)   Dwelling, low-rise.  A multi-family dwelling which is 35 feet or
less in building height.
      (19)   Dwelling, multi-family.  A dwelling containing three (3) or more
dwelling units.
      (20)   Dwelling, single-family.  A building containing one dwelling
unit.  This definition includes the term "manufactured home."
      (21)   Dwelling, single-family attached.  A single- family dwelling which
is attached to another dwelling.  Each attached single-family dwelling has
independent access to the dwelling from the outside and has no less than two
(2) exterior walls fully exposed and not in common with the exterior walls of
another dwelling.
      (22)   Dwelling, zero lot line.  A single-family dwelling with one or
more walls located on a side lot line(s) that is not on a street or alley
right-of-way line.
      (23)   Dwelling unit.  Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, sanitation, cooking, and
eating of meals for one (1) family.
      (24)   Dwelling unit, efficiency.  A dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room which serves as the occupant's living room, bedroom, and, in
some instances, the kitchen.
   (e)   (1)   Easement.  A right given by the owner of land to another person
for specific limited use of that land, e.g., to allow access to another
property or for utilities.
      (2)   Elderly housing.  A dwelling especially designed for use and
occupancy of persons who are 62 years of age or older or persons who are
disabled persons, as the term "disabled person" is defined in 42 U.S.C. 1437a
(b)(3)(D).
      (3)   Emergency housing.  A dwelling owned and operated by a non-profit
organization, as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
that provides a temporary residence for guests who are in need of emergency
shelter and who are temporarily unable to pay for housing.
      (4)   Enclosed.  Surrounded by walls and/or fences. See "Unenclosed
structure."
      (5)   Enlargement/expansion.  An increase in the volume of a building, an
increase in the area of land or building occupied by a use, or an increase in
the number of occupants or dwelling units.
      (6)   Excavation.  The act or process of forming a cavity by cutting,
digging, or scooping. Excavation does not include activities associated with an
agricultural use.
      (7)   Extraction.  The withdrawal of natural resources such as but not
limited to sand, gravel, or top soil as a business venture. Extraction  does
not include activities associated with an agricultural use or with the process
of grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building.
      (8)   Emergency.  A time of public danger or emergency as declared by the
Mayor in exercise of the Mayor's powers under
Section 7 of the Charter of the City of Springfield or a disaster endangering
the public welfare as declared by the City Commission by ordinance.
         (Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03)
      (9)   Emergency event.  Any occurrence that results in the declaration of
an emergency, as defined in subparagraph (8) above.
         (Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03)
   (f)   (1)   Fabrication.  The stamping, cutting, assembling or otherwise
shaping of processed materials into useful objects, excluding the refining or
other initial processing of basic raw materials.
      (2)   Factory-built housing park.  A tract of land which has been planned
and improved for the placement of manufactured homes, mobile homes and modular
homes on leased spaces.  The land is developed and operated as a unit.
      (3)   Family.  An individual or married couple and the children thereof
with not more than two other persons related directly to the individual or
married couple by blood, marriage, adoption or placement by a governmental or
social service agency.  A family may also be a group of not more than five (5)
persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit as
a single housekeeping organization.
      (4)   Family home.  A residential facility that provides room and board,
personal care, habilitation services and supervision in a family setting for at
least six (6) but not more than eight (8) mentally retarded or developmentally
disabled persons.
      (5)   Filling station/service station.  Any building or premises used
primarily for the dispensing or retail sale of motor fuel. This definition
includes the lubrication of automobiles and replacement or installation of
minor parts and accessories, but does not include major repair work such as
motor replacement, body and fender repair, or spray painting.  When the
dispensing or sale is incidental to the operation of a commercial garage, the
premises is classified as a commercial garage.
      (7)   Financial institution.  An establishment for the receiving,
keeping, lending of money, and the exchange of funds by checks or notes. This
definition includes banks, savings and loan establishments, and credit unions
but does not include pawn shops.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
      (8)   Fitness centers and health spas.  Commercial recreational uses
which are used primarily for physical exercise and health programs and which
include but are not limited to gymnasiums, aerobic studios, weight lifting
centers, racquetball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, and jogging trails.
      (9)   Flea market.  See "Antique shop."
      (10)   Floor area.  The total area of all floors of a building or portion
thereof measured to the outside surface of exterior walls or the centerline of
walls to separate uses or attached buildings.  It does not include garages,
porches, balconies, and other appurtenances.  Space in the basement and all
other space is included as floor area if used for a principal or accessory use
permitted in the zone in which the building is located.
      (11)   Floor area ratio (FAR).  The numerical value obtained by dividing
the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot.
      (12)   Foster family home. A residential facility that provides room and
board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family
setting for not more than five (5) mentally retarded or developmentally
disabled persons.
      (13)   Fraternity/sorority house.  A building used as a residence by a
chapter of a fraternal or sororal non-profit organization.  For purposes of
this Code, this definition does not include a rooming house.
      (14)   Frontage.  The distance along a street line from one intersecting
street to another, or from one intersecting street to the end of a dead end
street or cul-de-sac.
   (g)   (1)   Garage, commercial.  An automobile or truck oriented use in
which a building or premises is used for equipping, repairing, renting, selling
or storing motor vehicles, and at which motor fuels and supplies may be sold.
      (2)   Garages, private.  A detached accessory building or portion of a
principal building used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles
or recreational vehicles of the occupants of the premises and wherein no space
is rented for parking to a person not a resident of the premises.
      (3)   Grade.  The top surface elevation of lawns, walks, drives, or other
improved surfaces after completion of construction, grading, and landscaping. 
For the purpose of determining height of a building, the grade is the average
level of the perimeter of the exterior walls of the building.
      (4)   Ground area.  See "Floor area."
      (5)   Ground floor/first floor.  The lower-most floor of a building in
which the floor is at or above the grade.
      (6)   Group home.  A residential facility that provides room and board,
personal care, habilitation services, and supervision for at least nine (9) but
not more than 16 mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons.
      (7)     Guest.  An individual who resides within a building for less than
30 consecutive days.
   (h)   (1)   Halfway house.  A dwelling licensed by an adult parole authority
for adolescents or adults who have been institutionalized and released on
parole and who require the protection of a group setting.  (See Chapter 2967 of
the Ohio Revised Code.)
      (2)   Handicapped.  See "Developmentally disabled."
      (3)   Hedge.  A boundary formed by a row of closely planted shrubs or
bushes.
      (4)   Home occupation.  An accessory use to a dwelling unit that consists
of an occupation or profession operated by a person or persons living within
the dwelling unit.  A home occupation does not include such events as garage or
yard sales nor parties held to take orders for goods or services.
      (5)   Hospital.  An institution providing health services for human in-
patient medical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities
which are an integral part thereof such as laboratories, out-patient
facilities, staff offices, and emergency medical services.  Heliports,
helipads, and helistops are not considered as integral to a hospital.
      (6)   Hotel.  A building licensed by the State and consisting of
individual sleeping units designed or intended to be used as a place of lodging
for overnight guests.  Hotels may or may not provide meals, but there are
usually no cooking facilities provided in the sleeping units.  See "Hotel,
apartment."
      (7)   Hotel, apartment.  A multi-family dwelling under resident
supervision that consists of an inner lobby through which all tenants must pass
to gain access to the apartments and that may furnish services ordinarily
furnished by hotels such as a drug store, barber shop, cosmetologist, cigar
stand or newsstand.  Such services are located entirely within the building
with no separate entrance from the street, have no display visible from any
sidewalk, nor have a sign or display visible from outside of  the building
indicating the existence of such services.
   (i)   Reserved.
   (j)   (1)   Junk yard.  Synonymous with Salvage Yard.
   (k)   (1)   Kennel.  An establishment where small animals are bred, raised,
trained, groomed, and boarded for compensation, sale or other commercial
purposes.
   (l)   (1)   Land Use Plan.  The Clark County Comprehensive Land Use Plan of
1999, as amended, as it has been adopted by the Planning Boards having
jurisdiction in the City.  Known colloquially as the Crossroads Plan.
         (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
      (2)   Livestock.  Livestock, for the purpose of this code includes, but
is not limited to, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry, and animal specialties such
as horses, rabbits, bees, pets, fish, llamas, ostriches, emus, fur-bearing
mammals, and other non-carnivorous animals in captivity; but does not include
domestic dogs and cats.
      (3)   Living unit.  See "Dwelling unit."
      (4)   Loading space, off-street.  Space logically and conveniently
located and designed for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to the delivery
vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when off-street
parking spaces are occupied.
      (5)   Lodging house.  See "Rooming house."
      (6)   Long term care facility.  See "Nursing home."
      (7)   Lot.  A lot of record or a lot that is leased which is occupied or
intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and an accessory
building or use and is of sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements for
a principal use.
      (8)   Lot, corner.  A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets, where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
      (9)   Lot, double frontage.  A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
      (10)   Lot, interior.  A lot other than a corner lot or double frontage
lot and bounded by a street on only one side.
      (11)   Lot area.  The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding
any area located within a public or private street.
      (12)   Lot coverage.  The percentage of the lot area covered by the
building area.
      (13)   Lot depth.  The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the
front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line measured at a right angle
to the front lot line.
      (14)   Lot frontage.  The continuous width of a lot measured along the
front lot line, the front or rear lot line of a double frontage lot, or of a
front or side lot line of a corner lot. The frontage is measured parallel to
the centerline of the street(s) and never constitutes the end width of a dead
end street.
      (15)   Lot line.  A line oriented in terms of stable points of reference
which establish one boundary of a lot.
      (16)   Lot line, front.  A lot line separating the lot from the street. 
On corner lots, the front lot line is the shortest street dimension except that
if the lot is square or almost square, i.e., has dimensions at the ratio of
from 3:2 to 3:3, then the front lot line may be along either street.
      (17)   Lot line, rear.  The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.  In the case of a triangular shaped lot with its apex to the
rear, it is an imaginary line within the lot, 10 feet in length, and parallel
to and farthest from the front lot line.
      (18)   Lot line, side.  Any lot line which meets the end of a front lot
line and any lot line which is not a front lot line or rear lot line.
      (19)   Lot of record.  A lot which is part of a subdivision or a parcel
of land which is described by metes and bounds, the map and/or description of
which have been recorded in the office of the County Recorder or County
Auditor.
      (20)   Lot width.  The length of the front yard line.
   (m)   (1)   Manufactured home.  A factory-built single- family dwelling
which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec.
5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards; which is not
constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved
other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site; and which does not
have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.  A mobile
home constructed to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real
property and is taxed as a site built dwelling.  For the purpose of this Code,
a manufactured home is considered a single-family detached dwelling.
      (2)   Meeting hall.  A facility rented to groups on a noncontinuous basis
for social functions, exhibitions, entertainment, education, instruction and
similar purposes.  Such a facility includes customary ancillary space such as
restrooms, kitchens, foyers, work and dressing rooms, and storage areas.
      (3)   Mobile home.  A vehicle suitable for occupancy as a single-family
dwelling that is greater than 400 square feet in gross floor area and is
designed with attached axles and wheels to be drawn on streets and highways by
a motor vehicle to a site where such dwellings are permitted.  A mobile home is
not construed as a travel trailer or other form of recreational vehicle and is
subject to all regulations applying to a mobile home whether or not wheels,
axles, hitch, or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and regardless of
the nature of the foundation provided.  However, certain mobile homes may be
classified as "manufactured homes."
      (4)   Mobile home park.  A factory-built housing park used exclusively
for mobile homes.
      (5)   Model home.  A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a
residential development under construction.  The home is used for on- site
sales and not for general real estate business.
      (6)   Modular home.  A single-family dwelling which is manufactured in
whole or in components at a place other than the location where it is to be
permanently located; which is assembled in whole or in components at the
location where it is to be permanently located; which rests on a permanent
foundation or slab; which does not have wheels or axles affixed as a part of
its normal construction; and which does not require a license by any agency as
a motor vehicle, special equipment, trailer, motor home, or mobile home.
      (7)   Mortuary/funeral home.  An establishment in which the dead are
prepared for burial or cremation. The establishment may include a chapel and
spaces for the conduct of funeral services and informal gatherings.
      (8)   Motel.  A building or group of buildings licensed by the State and
consisting of individual sleeping units designed or intended to be used as a
place of lodging for overnight guests.  The term "motel" includes "motor
hotel."
      (9)   Micropigmentation.  Applying pigment under the skin primarily above
the neck for reconstructive and permanent cosmetic purposes.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
      (10)   Microbottler. An establishment for the production and packaging of
beverages for distribution, retail and/or wholesale, on or off premise.
         (Ord. 15-41. Passed 2-17-15.)
   (n)   (1)   Non-conforming building/structure.  A building or structure or
portion thereof that was lawful at the time of its establishment but that does
not now conform to the provisions of this Code relative to height, yards, or
building coverage for the zone in which it is located by reason of the adoption
of this Code or subsequent amendments thereto.
      (2)   Non-conforming lot.  A lot that was lawful at the time of its
establishment but does not now conform to the provisions of this Code relative
to lot frontage, width or area for the zone in which it is located by reason of
the adoption of this code or subsequent amendments thereto.
      (3)   Non-conforming use.  Any use that was lawful at the time of its
establishment but that is not now allowed within the zone in which it is
located or any way in which land or a building is used that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this Code by reason of the adoption of this
code or subsequent amendments thereto.
      (4)   Nursing home.  A facility operated by a private or non-profit
corporation or association and licensed or regulated by a governmental entity
for the accommodation of convalescents or other persons who are not in need of
hospital care but who require skilled care and/or related services.
      (5)   Nursery, plant materials.  A principal use that includes the
storage, propagation, cultivation, and transplanting of live trees, shrubs, or
plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used
primarily for gardening or landscaping.  This definition does not include any
space, building or structure used primarily for the sale of fruits, vegetables
or Christmas trees.
   (o)   (1)   Office.  A building or an area within a building used for
conducting the affairs of a business, profession, financial institution,
service, industry, government, or similar activity.  In association with such
activity, there is no activity carried on catering to retail trade with the
general public; no stock of goods maintained for sale to customers; no
production, processing, fabrication, or distribution of goods on or from the
premises; and no more than 49 percent of the office use used for accessory
storage.
      (2)   Open space.  That portion of a lot substantially open to the sky. 
The area may include natural environmental features, patios, water areas,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreational areas and facilities. 
Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation, and the like are not
included.
      (3)   Open space, common.  Open space the use of which is shared by all
occupants of more than one dwelling unit, as distinguished from private open
space.
      (4)   Open space, private.  Open space used by occupants of a dwelling
unit.
      (5)   Overlay district.  A set of zoning requirements that is imposed in
addition to those of the underlying district. Developments within the overlay
district must conform to the requirements of both districts or, in the case of
a disparity, the more restrictive requirements of the two.
      (6)   Owner.  Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
has legal title to any land or structure, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; has charge, care or control of any land or structure as
owner or agent of the owner; or serves as executor, administrator, conservator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.  Any person representing the
actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provision of this code and of
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she
were the owner.
   (p)   (1)   Parking area.  An off-street facility providing vehicular
parking spaces, along with adequate aisles and tree islands, for the parking of
more than four (4) motor vehicles.
      (2)   Parking space.  An area exclusive of drives, aisles, and tree
islands intended for off-street vehicular parking.  Such space is not intended
for the storage or display of motor vehicles.
      (3)   Patio.  An uncovered surfaced outdoor living area at grade abutting
and accessible from a dwelling.
      (4)   Performance standard.  A minimum requirement or maximum allowable
limit on the effects or characteristics of a use, written in the form of
regulatory language.
      (5)   Permitted use.  A principal use which is allowed in the zone in
which it is listed subject to compliance with the dimensional requirements and
special requirements (if any) of the zone in which it is listed and general
requirements of this code.
      (6)   Person.  Any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any entity, including state and local governments
and agencies.
      (7)   Personal service establishment.  An establishment primarily engaged
in providing services generally involving the care of the person or his/her
apparel.  Such establishments include but are not limited to the following: 
laundry, cleaning and garment services; photographic studios; beauty parlors
(including manicure and pedicure salons); barber shops; shoe repair shops, shoe
shine parlors, and hat cleaning shops; funeral homes; and other establishments
engaged in providing personal services such as tanning salons, steam baths,
reducing salons and health clubs, clothing rental, locker rental, and porter
services (see major group 72 of the Standard Manufacturing Classification
Manual).  For purposes of this code, an adult business is not defined as a
personal service establishment.
      (8)   Planning Board.  The City Planning Board or the CEDA Planning
Commission which has jurisdiction over the subject territory.
         (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
      (9)   Planting area.  An unpaved pervious area used or intended to be
used for the placement of a tree or other plant materials.
      (10)   Porch.  A covered entrance to a building consisting of a platform
area, with open or partially enclosed sides.  If the roof is supported by walls
or columns, the porch is considered to be part of the building to which it is
attached.  If the roof is supported by braces attached to the building, the
porch is not considered to be part of the building.
      (11)   Premises.  A general term meaning part or all of any lot, parcel
or tract or part or all of any building or structure or group of buildings or
structures located thereon.
      (12)   Principal building.  A building which contains the principal use.
      (13)   Principal use.  The primary use(s) of land or a structure as
distinguished from an accessory use, e.g., a house is a principal use in a
residential area and a garage or pool is an accessory use.
      (14)   Projections (into yards).  Parts of buildings such as
architectural features which protrude into the required yard or yards.
      (15)   Provisional use.  A principal use which is allowed in the zone in
which it is listed subject to compliance with specific requirements mentioned
with the use.  These requirements are in addition to all other general
requirements applicable to the use.
      (16)  Public use.  A use operated by a unit of government to serve public
needs, including public parks, schools, fire stations, community centers,
recreation centers and cultural and governmental buildings and structures.
      (17)   Public utility.  Any entity which provides essential products or
services to the public with the characteristic of service to, or readiness to
serve, and indefinite public which has a legal right to demand and receive the
entity's products or services and which conducts its operations in such a
manner as to be a matter of public concern.  {'{'}See, A & B Refuse Disposers,
Inc. v Board of Ravenna Township Trustees (1992), 64 Ohio State 3d 385{'}'}.
      (18)   Public way.  An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch,
easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, road, sidewalk, street,
subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk, bicycle path, or other ways in which the general
public or a public entity have a certain right, whether improved or not.
   (q)   (1)   Quarry.  See "Extraction."
   (r)   (1)   Reconstruct.  To rebuild a structure that has been destroyed or
demolished.  For purposes of this definition, reconstruct does not apply to the
removal and replacement of all or part of a building or structure in the same
configuration.
      (2)   Recreation camp.  An area of land on which two or more travel
trailers, campers, tents or other similar temporary recreational structures or
vehicles are regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any
building, structure, fixture, or equipment that is used or intended to be used
in connection with providing such accommodations.
      (3)   Recreational vehicle.  A vehicle which is:
         A.   built on a single chassis,
         B.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection,
         C.   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck, and
         D.   designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
         Examples include a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper,
motor home, fifth-wheel trailer, and van.  For purposes of this code, a
recreational vehicle is not convertible to a manufactured home or mobile home
or to a structure similar to such dwellings.
      (4)   Recycling facility.  Any facility where waste or scrap materials
are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled, or
handled.  Materials include scrap metals, paper, rags, tires, and bottles.
      (5)   Religious institution.  An organization that has a religious
purpose and that has been granted an exemption from federal taxes under the
Internal Revenue Code as a Sec. 501(c)(3) organization.  This definition
includes but is not limited to churches, synagogues, convents, monasteries,
parsonages, and temples and accessory uses and components of the principal use
such as but not limited to rectories, and meeting halls.  This definition does
not include the headquarters office of a denomination of religious institutions
when located on a separate lot from a religious institution nor such commercial
activities as bingo parlors and day-care centers.
      (6)   Remodel/repair.  Any improvement to a building which is not a
structural enlargement or reconstruction.
      (7)   Residential facility.  A dwelling in which a mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled person resides (not including a dwelling in which a
mentally retarded or developmentally disabled person resides with a relative or
legal guardian); a respite care home certified under section 5126.05 of the
Ohio Revised Code; or a dwelling in which the only mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled residents are in an independent living arrangement or
are being provided supported living pursuant to sections 5126.40 to 5126.47 of
the Ohio Revised Code.
      (8)   Restaurant.  A business where the dispensing at indoor tables and
the consumption at indoor or outdoor tables of edible foodstuff and/or beverage
is the principal business. This definition includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee
shop, delicatessen, lunch room, tearoom, dining room, bar, cocktail lounge and
tavern.  The total seating area located within the enclosed portion of the
premises is more than 50 percent of the total floor area for the restaurant. 
This definition does not include a drive-in or carry-out restaurant.
      (9)   Restaurant, drive-in/carry-out.  An automobile and truck oriented
use whose principal operation is the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or
beverage for consumption in vehicles, at indoor or outdoor tables, at stand-up
counters or to be carried off the premises.  Orders generally are not taken at
the customer's table and the food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.  The total seating area, if provided, is less than 50 percent of
the total floor area of the restaurant.
      (10)   Retail establishment.  An establishment engaged in selling
merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of the goods. Such establishments will have the
following characteristics:  the establishment is usually a place of business
and is engaged in activities to attract the general public to buy; the
establishment buys or receives merchandise as well as sells; the establishment
may process its products, but such processing is incidental or subordinate to
selling; the establishment is considered as retail in the trade; and the
establishment sells to customers for business or personal use.
      (11)   Rezoning.  A change from one district to another.  Rezonings can
take two forms:
         A.   A comprehensive revision or modification of the zoning map; or
         C.   A change in a portion of the map, i.e., the zoning designation of
a particular parcel or parcels.
      (12)   Right-of-way.  A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a
public way.  As a roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, tree lawns,
sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special features
(required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped
areas, viaducts and bridges.
      (13)   Roadside stand.  A temporary structure designed or used for the
display or sale of agricultural and related products.
      (14)   Roof.  The top covering of a building constructed to shield the
area beneath from the weather.  The term "roof" includes the term "canopy."
      (15)   Roof line.  The deck line of a mansard roof, the ridge of a
saddle, hip, gable, gambrel, or ogee roof; or the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof for a multi-family dwelling or a nonresidential use or the
midpoint of a mansard roof; the midpoint between the ridge and eaves of a
saddle, hip, gable, gambrel, or ogee roof; or the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof for a single or two family dwelling.
      (16)   Roomer.  An occupant of a rooming house or rooming unit or an
occupant of a dwelling unit who is not a member of the family occupying the
dwelling unit.
      (17)   Rooming house.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units.  Bath and toilet facilities and a
communal kitchen and dining area may be made available for use of all the
occupants.
      (18)   Rooming unit.  Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms located within a rooming house and forming a single unit with facilities
which are used, or intended to be used, for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking.  A rooming unit may have bath and toilet facilities available for
exclusive use of the occupants of the rooming unit.
      (19)   Row house.  See "Townhouse."
   (s)   (1)   Salvage yard.  A place where waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, stored, recycled, sold, exchanged, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled.  This definition includes auto wrecking yards, junk
yards, tire shredding operations, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials, and equipment, composting operations, and recycling centers. This
definition does not include pawn shops and establishments for the sale,
purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment; used cars in
operable condition; salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations;
or sanitary landfills.
      (2)   School, generalized public or private instruction.  A public or
private school which includes any of the following: elementary and secondary
schools below university level (ordinarily grades 1 through 12), including
denominational and sectarian; kindergartens; military academies; and colleges,
universities, and professional schools, granting academic degrees and requiring
for admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic
training.
      (3)   School, specialized public or private instruction.  A public or
private school which includes any of the following: establishments primarily
engaged in offering data processing courses in programming and in computer and
peripheral equipment operation; establishments primarily engaged in offering
courses in business machines operation, office procedures, and secretarial and
stenographic skills; establishments primarily engaged in offering specialized
trade or commercial courses, not elsewhere classified; specialized non-degree
granting schools, not elsewhere classified, such as music schools, dramatic
schools, language schools, and Civil Service and other short term examination
preparatory schools; and establishments primarily engaged in operating dance
studios and schools.
      (4)   Seat.  For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking
spaces for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units
installed or indicated, chairs, or each 20 lineal inches of space on benches or
pews.
      (5)   Separate tract.  An abutting group of lots which are developed for
a use or uses which share common facilities, e.g. off-street parking, loading
and driveways.  A separate tract shall be considered as a single lot in the
application of the requirements of this Code.
      (6)   Setback line.  A line established by this Code that is parallel
with and measured from the lot line and defines the limits of a yard within
which no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be
provided by this Code.  The area between the setback line and the lot line is
referred to in this Code as the required yard.
         (Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03)
      (7)   Sexual encounter establishment, Sexually oriented adult
entertainment, and Sexually oriented business.  Each term shall each have the
meaning assigned to them by Section
707.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 19-85. Passed 3-26-19.)
      (8)   Sidewalk.  That portion of the street right- of-way outside the
traveled surface which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
      (9)   Special exception.  See "Conditional use."
      (10)   Stacking space.  An asphalt, concrete or similar permanent dust
free surface which is designed to accommodate a motor vehicle waiting for entry
to an automobile and truck oriented use, which is located in such a way that a
parking space or access to a parking space is not obstructed, and which is at
least nine (9) feet in width and 19 feet in length.
      (11)   Story.  That portion of building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the
finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is
more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent
of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at
any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a
story.
      (12)   Street.  A way that is open to the public for use of vehicular
traffic as a matter of right, is a minimum of 30 feet in width, and has a
driving surface which either meets the City's specifications or is acceptable
to the City Engineer for vehicular traffic.  A street may exist as a public
street if it is owned or controlled by the City or as a private street if it is
owned and maintained by persons other than the City.  This definition includes
the term avenue, boulevard, circle, drive, highway, lane, parkway, road,
thoroughfare, or any other similar term.
      (13)   Street, arterial.  A street whose principal function is to provide
for through traffic and is designed to carry large volumes of traffic.  Primary
and secondary arterial streets are designated on the Land Use
      (14)   Street, collector.  A street whose principal function is for
carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets and which is required
by
Part Twelve, SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS, of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield
to have a right-of-way width of 60 feet.
      (15)   Street, cul-de-sac.  A local street terminating in a turnaround.
      (16)   Street, local.  A street used primarily for access to abutting
property and which is required by Part Twelve, SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS, of the
Codified Ordinances of Springfield to have a right-of-way width of 50 feet.
      (17)   Street, private.  A right-of-way or easement in private ownership,
not dedicated or maintained as a public street, and which affords the principal
means of access to two or more lots or to condominium units.
      (18)   Structure.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on
the ground.  This definition includes but is not limited to buildings, mobile
homes, sheds, radio and television towers, dish antennas, solar devices,
swimming pools, walls, fences, billboards, heat pumps, air conditioning
compressors, animal shelters, and signs.  This definition excludes vehicles and
sidewalks, paving and other flat surfaces at grade.
      (19)   Structural enlargement.  Any change in the configuration of the
exterior walls, foundation or the roof of a building which results in an
increase in the area, height or volume of the building.
      (20)   Sub-standard lot.  See "non-conforming lot."
      (21)   Swimming pool, private.  Any pool, pond, lake or open tank at,
above or below the grade, enclosed or unenclosed, and containing or normally
capable of containing water to a depth of any point greater than three (3)
feet.
   (t)   (1)   Temporary structure/building.  Any building or structure which
is placed on a lot without a permanent foundation.
      (2)   Temporary emergency recovery use. A temporary structure used during
the reconstruction or restoration or replacement of a structure damaged by an
emergency event, the use of which is limited to the use to which the damaged
structure was being put immediately prior to the emergency event and that is
authorized by the Community Development Director to be conducted for a fixed
period of time sufficient for the damaged structure to be reconstructed or
restored or replaced.
         (Ord. 03-315.  Passed 9-16-03)
      (3)   Theater.  A building used primarily for the presentation of live
stage productions, performances, or motion pictures.
      (4)   Townhouse.  A complex containing not less than three (3) nor more
than six (6) attached single-family dwellings (townhouse units) with each
single-family dwelling being located on a separate lot.
      (5)   Thoroughfare Plan.  The Official Thoroughfare Plan, as adopted and
as amended from time to time by the Planning Board having jurisdiction,
establishing the general location of arterial and collector streets in the City
and on file in the City Community Development Department.
         (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
      (6)   Tatoo Parlor.  An establishment where pigments are applied under
the skin for decorative body art.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03; Ord. 14-113; Passed 5-13-14.)
      (7)   Tap Room. A room that is ancillary to the production of beverages
at a microbottler where the public can purchase and/or consume the beverages
that are produced on site.
         (Ord. 15-41.  Passed 2-17-15.)
   (u)   (1)   Unenclosed structure.  A structure that may contain a roof but
is not enclosed on more than two (2) sides by walls or fences.  See "Enclosed."
      (2)   Use.  The specific purpose or activity for which land, structures
or a portion thereof is designated, arranged, intended, or for which it is or
may be occupied or maintained.
      (3)   Use, accessory.  See "Accessory structure/use."
      (4)   Use, non-conforming.  See "Non-conforming use."
      (5)   Use, permitted.  See "Permitted use."
      (6)   Use, principal.  See "Principal use."
      (7)   Use, provisional.  See "Provisional use."
   (v)   (1)   Vacation.  The process by which the City discontinues the use of
a street, alley, or easement as a public way.
      (2)   Variance.  A modification of the strict terms of the relevant
regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest
and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of
the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would
result in "unnecessary and undue hardship" or a "practical difficulty."  The
authority to grant variances is vested in the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Variety store.  An establishment engaged in the retail sale of a
variety of merchandise in the low to middle price ranges.  These stores do not
carry a complete line of merchandise, are not departmentalized, and do not
deliver merchandise.  These stores are distinguished from other similar stores
listed in the 1987 Standard Manufacturing Classification Manual, Major Group
53, General Merchandise.
      (4)   Vehicle.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a street.
      (5)   Vehicle, storage of.  A vehicle or portion thereof which is parked
in the same position for a period of 48 hours or more.
      (6)   Veterinary animal hospital or clinic.  A place used for the care,
grooming, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals,
and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may include
overnight accommodations on the premises for their treatment, observation, and/
or recuperation.  It may also include boarding that is incidental to the
primary activity. This definition does not include a kennel.
   (w)   (1)   Walkway.  A public way that is at least three (3) feet or more
in width for pedestrian use, whether within a street or not.  See "Sidewalk."
      (2)   Warehouse, wholesale or storage.  A building or premises in which
goods or equipment are stored for eventual sale or distribution.
      (3)   Wrecking yard.  See "Salvage yard."
   (x)   Reserved.
   (y)   (1)   Yard.  A required area on a lot unoccupied by structures above
grade except for projections and the specific minor uses or structures allowed
in such area under the provisions of this Code.  A yard extends from the grade
upward.
      (2)   Yard, front.  The required area across a lot between the front yard
line and the street right of way line.  In the case of a double frontage lot,
the front yard is along the local street and the rear yard is along the
arterial street.
      (3)   Yard, rear.  The required area from one side lot line to another
side lot line and between the rear yard line and the rear lot line.
      (4)   Yard, side.  The required area from the front yard line to the rear
yard line and from the side yard line to the side lot line.
      (5)   Yard line, front.  A line from one side lot line to another side
lot line, parallel to the street, and as far back from the street as required
in this Code for the front yard.
      (6)   Yard line, rear.  A line parallel to the rear lot line and as far
forward from the rear lot line as required by this Code.  See "Lot line, rear."
      (7)   Yard line, side.  A line parallel to the side lot line and as far
from the side lot line as required by this Code.
   (z)   (1)   Zone.  See "District."
      (2)   Zoning certificate.  A document issued by the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee which indicates that the proposed use of land
meets the requirements of this code.
      (3)   Zoning map.  The map delineating the boundaries of districts which,
along with the zoning text, comprises the Zoning Code.
         (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
 
 
TITLE TWO - Uses Permitted by District
Chap.
1105   A Agricultural District.
Chap.
1106   RR-1 Rural Residence District.
Chap.
1107   RS-5 Low-Density, Single Family Residence District.
Chap.
1108   RS-8 Medium-Density, Single-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1109   RFBH Factory-Built Housing Residence District.
Chap.
1111   RM-12 Low-Density, Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1112   RM-20 Medium-Density, Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1113   CN-2 Neighborhood Commercial District.
Chap.
1114   RM-44 High-Density, Multi-Family Residence District.
Chap.
1115   RM-44A High-Density, Multi-Use District.
Chap.
1116   CO-1 Commercial Office District.
Chap.
1117   CN-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
Chap.
1118   CC-2 Community Commercial District.
Chap.
1119   EC-1 Educational Campus District.
Chap.
1120   CB-10 Central Business District.
Chap.
1121   CH-1 Highway Commercial District.
Chap.
1122   CI-1 Intensive Commercial District.
Chap.
1123   RDP Research and Development Park District.
Chap.
1124   M-1 General Manufacturing District.
Chap.
1125   M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District.
Chap.
1126   G Green Space, Park and School District.
Chap.
1127   OFP Flood Plain Overlay District.
Chap.
1128   OHP Historic Preservation Overlay District.
Chap.
1129   OPD-H Planned Development Housing Overlay District.
Chap.
1130   CC-2A Shopping Center District.
Chap.
1131   UCOD Urban Commercial Overlay District.
Chap.
1132   UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District.
Chap.
1133   DMC Downtown Medical Campus District.
Chap.
1135   Requirements for Specific Uses.
Chap.
1140   PD Planned Development District.
Chap.
1141.   UPOD Unified Plan Overlay District.
Chap.
1142.   EECPOD Eastern Edge Corridor Plan Overlay District.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1105
A Agricultural District
 
1105.01   Purpose.
1105.02   Principal uses permitted.
1105.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1105.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1105.05   Accessory uses.
1105.06   General provisions.
1105.07   Special provisions.
 
1105.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for areas of open space or of
managed growth in which agricultural uses of land may establish or continue
until such time as the City is able to provide municipal services required of
urban development.  In some areas agricultural uses may be the ultimate
preferred development.  Upon the provision of municipal services, the City or a
property owner may initiate rezoning of property for uses consistent with the
intended use of the property in the future.  Accordingly, A districts are
illustrated on the Zoning Map as to their future intended land use by the
designations of either A (for agricultural use) A-R (for residential use), A-C
(for commercial use), or A-I (for manufacturing use).
 
1105.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Agricultural use.
   (b)   Dwelling, farm.
 
1105.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Composting operation, provided it shall be located a minimum of 1320
feet from an R district boundary.
   (b)   Stable or kennel, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   For an agricultural use with hogs, a certificate from the Clark County
Combined Health District shall be obtained.
      (Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
1105.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Cemetery or mausoleum, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Communication tower or satellite receiving device, subject to the
requirements of Chapter
1136.
   (d)   Dwelling, family home or day-care home, provided the dwelling existed
as a farm dwelling on the effective date of this ordinance.  The resident
family need not maintain and operate, own, nor have a leasehold interest in the
farm of which the original farm dwelling was a part.
   (e)   Public utility or public use.
   (f)   Recreation camp.
 
1105.05  ACCESSORY USES.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RR-1 district shall be permitted. 
However, the following accessory uses shall meet the requirements noted:
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
   (a)   Roadside stand for the sale of produce grown on the premises, provided
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The maximum floor area shall be 600 square feet.
      (2)   The stand shall be located no closer than the required setback from
a street as established in Chapter
1150.
      (3)   Vehicular access to the stand shall be from an existing principal
entrance to the farm or farm dwelling.
 
1105.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the general requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1105.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1106
RR-1 Rural Residence District
 
1106.01   Purpose.
1106.02   Principal uses permitted.
1106.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1106.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1106.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1106.06   General provisions.
1106.07   Special provisions.
 
1106.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for areas of a rural residential
character.  Such areas may be established similar in nature to subdivisions
established in unincorporated areas.  Accordingly, new local street pavements
may be constructed to a width of 24 feet with berm and side ditches as
permitted in Section
1211.02 of Part 12, Subdivision Regulations, of the Codified Ordinances of
Springfield.
 
1106.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Day-care home, type B.
   (c)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
   (d)   Family home.
 
1106.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Accessory apartment, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Religious institution, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
 
1106.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Communication tower or satellite receiving device as an accessory use
that cannot meet the requirements of section
1106.05(a) below. However, refutable evidence shall be presented to demonstrate
that communications are substantially impaired when meeting the requirements of
section
1106.05(a).  In addition, a communication tower or satellite receiving device
shall meet the requirements of Chapter
1136.
   (c)   Day-care home, type A.
   (d)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   School, generalized private instruction for kindergarten through
twelfth grade students.
   (f)   Community Center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
 
1106.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses permitted in this district may include but are not
limited to those listed below; provided, however, under no circumstance shall
any mechanical or vehicular body repairs, painting, pulling of engines or the
maintenance of vehicles other than those owned by the occupant of the premises
be permitted.
   (a)   Communication tower or satellite receiving device, provided it shall
meet the following requirements:
      (1)   It shall not be located in the area between the street and the
building line; side yard where abutting a lot in a R district; nor on the roof
of any building.  This limitation shall not apply to a satellite receiving
device two (2) feet or less in diameter or to an electronic receiving antenna.
      (2)   A tower shall be set back from another lot in a R district a
distance of 20 percent of the tower's height or the distance between the tower
base and guy wire anchors, whichever is greater.
      (3)   It shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Essential service which routes electrical, gas, telephone, water or
cable TV service and includes distribution lines consisting of cables, wires or
pipes and associated line hardware such as transformers, relays and shut-off
valves.
   (c)   Fence as regulated by Chapter
1156.
   (d)   Garage.
   (e)   Greenhouse or conservatory.
   (f)   Home occupation as regulated by Chapter
1135.
   (g)   Parking, off-street, as regulated by Chapter
1153.
   (h)   Pet shelter, not including a kennel.
   (i)   Recreational use and facility, including but not limited to a swimming
pool, tennis court, gazebo, open or enclosed patio, deck, balcony or similar
structure for recreational purposes.
   (j)   Sign as regulated by Chapter
1155.
   (k)   Storage building with a maximum floor area of 120 square feet for the
storage of wood, lumber, gardening equipment or other materials and equipment
exclusively for the use of the residents of the premises and provided that only
one (1) such building shall be permitted on a lot.  A storage building for
commercial purposes, other than for a home occupation, shall be prohibited.
 
1106.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1106.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1107
RS-5 Low-Density, Single-Family Residential District
 
1107.01   Purpose.
1107.02   Principal uses permitted.
1107.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1107.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1107.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1107.06   General provisions.
1107.07   Special provisions.
 
1107.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential
development consistent with the single-family residential character of lower
density residential development in the city.  Development within this district
is expected to have a neighborhood orientation; therefore, parks, schools,
religious institutions and neighborhood commercial facilities are expected to
be located in close proximity to residential development.  Compatibility of
development in this district should be encouraged, and related non-residential
uses and structures should be planned and designed to be in character with the
scale and pattern of the residential development.
 
1107.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Day-care home, type B.
   (c)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
   (d)   Family home.
 
1107.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Accessory apartment, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
 
1107.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Day-care home, type A.
   (c)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Religious institution, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   School, generalized private instruction for kindergarten through
twelfth grade students.
   (f)   Daycare center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (g)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-93; 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1107.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RR-1 district shall be permitted.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1107.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1107.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   If a tract of land 10 acres or greater in area is being subdivided or
resubdivided into lots, it may be developed with a minimum average lot size of
8,400 square feet; minimum lot sizes of 7,200 square feet; and minimum lot
widths of 60 feet.  For the purpose of meeting the average lot size
requirement, lots with more area than 10,000 square feet shall be calculated as
having 10,000 square feet.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1108
RS-8 Medium-Density, Single-Family Resdience District
 
1108.01   Purpose.
1108.02   Principal uses permitted.
1108.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1108.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1108.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1108.06   General provisions.
1108.07   Special provisions.
 
1108.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of small lot
single-family dwellings and to preserve the character of existing small lot
subdivisions in the city.  This district represents a relatively high density
for single-family development, thus dwellings in this district should be in
close proximity to all city services and facilities, especially parks, schools
and recreational facilities.  Special attention should be given to landscaping
and site development in this district. Special provisions of this district are
designed to permit dwellings with no side yard to accommodate single family
attached dwellings.
 
1108.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Day-care home, type B.
   (c)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
   (d)   Family home.
 
1108.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Duplex, provided it shall be developed in accordance with the
dimensional requirements of the RM-12 district and that the minimum lot area is
8,700 square feet and the minimum lot area per unit is 4,350 square feet.
   (b)   Dwelling, zero lot line or attached, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135.
 
1108.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Day-care home, type A.
   (c)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Religious institution, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   School, generalized private instruction for kindergarten through
twelfth grade students.
   (f)   Museums consisting of an architecturally significant house listed on
the National Register of Historic Places and located in a city-designated
historic district or in a historic district listed on the National Register of
Historic Places; together with specific, approved, related commercial
operations to serve museum patrons (such as, by way of example, a museum
store).
      (Ord. 02-272.  Passed 7-9-02.)
   (f)   Daycare center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (g)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-93; 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1108.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RR-1 district shall be permitted.  In
lieu of a 120 square foot storage building, there may be a storage building of
not more than 64 square feet for each duplex unit.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1108.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1108.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   If a tract of land 10 acres or greater in area is being subdivided or
resubdivided into lots, it may be developed with a minimum average lot size of
5,000 square feet and with minimum lot sizes of 4,000 square feet.  For the
purpose of meeting the average lot size requirement, lots with more area than
7,500 square feet shall be calculated as having 7,500 square feet.  Lots less
than 5,000 square feet in area shall be developed with one (1) wall of a
dwelling unit having a zero (0) side yard.
 
   (b)   Development with two or more provisional uses, conditional uses, or a
combination of uses on a lot larger than two (2) acres shall be approved by the
Planning Board and the City Commission in the same manner as amendments to the
Springfield Zoning Code, meeting the procedural requirements of Chapter
1174. The plan shall be submitted in the manner and with the information
described as follows:
      (1)   A conceptual plan of the development showing, at a minimum, the
following:
         A.   Size of the tract to be developed.
         B.   Existing topographic features of the land, including drainage
ways, wooded areas and contours.
         C.   General location of uses.
         D.   General location of any public uses, if any.
         E.   Traffic circulation patterns within the development.
         F.   Methods of buffering the development from adjacent uses.
         G.   General treatment of signage for the development.
         H.   Anticipated accommodation for stormwater management.
         I.   Means of waste disposal.
      (2)   The conceptual plan is intended to be a guide for the development. 
Building permits shall be evaluated by the Community Development Director or
his designee for compliance with the guidelines of the plan and the
requirements of the development standards.  Permit applications which do not
meet the guidelines of the plan and the requirements of the standards shall be
denied.  Amendment of the plan shall be accomplished in the same manner as its
original approval.
      (3)   In its review of the proposed development, the Planning Board and
the City Commission shall make specific finding of fact relative to the
following criteria:
         A.   That the development will be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing
or officially planned uses of the general vicinity and  that such use will not
change the essential character of the same area.
         B.   That the development will not be hazardous or disturbing to
existing or officially planned future neighboring uses from the standpoint of
noise, lights, congestion or traffic generation which would be incompatible
with the neighborhood environment.
         C.   That the development will be served adequately by essential
public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools;
or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the
proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services.
         D.   That the development will not involve uses, activities and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or
the general welfare.
         E.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create and interfer with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares.
            (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1109
RFBH Factory-Built Housing Residence District
 
1109.01   Purpose.
1109.02   Principal uses permitted.
1109.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1109.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1109.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1109.06   General provisions.
1109.07   Special provisions.
 
1109.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for the placement of factory-
built homes within parks for factory-built housing or upon individually
subdivided lots with a lot size smaller than that allowed in other districts
permitting single-family dwellings.  The RFBH district also provides a location
for the placement of homes which do not have a minimum building width of 20
feet.
 
1109.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Day-care home, type B.
   (c)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
   (d)   Family home.
 
1109.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Dwelling, zero lot line or attached, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135.
 
1109.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Day-care home, type A.
   (c)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Religious institution subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.   
   (e)   School, generalized private instruction.
   (f)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1109.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RR-1 district shall be permitted.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1109.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six.
 
1109.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   A factory-built housing development shall be subject to the following
special provisions:
   (a)   In no instance shall an area zoned RFBH be less than 10 acres nor
consist of less than 25 sites for factory-built homes.
   (b)   A setback of 40 ft. shall be provided for all factory built dwellings
from an RFBH district boundary.
   (c)   Parks for factory-built homes shall comply with the requirements of
the Ohio Administrative Code, Chapter 3701-3727.
   (d   Parks and subdivisions for factory-built homes shall be screened from
abutting RS districts according to Subsection
1161.02(i), Screening. It shall be the responsibility of the lot owners in a
subdivision to maintain the screen along the boundary of the district
coincident to the lot lines.
   (e)   Parks for factory-built homes shall be subject to the Special;
Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1111
RM-12 Low-Density, Multi-Family Residence District
 
1111.01   Purpose.
1111.02   Principal uses permitted.
1111.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1111.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1111.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1111.06   General provisions.
1111.07   Special provisions.
 
1111.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for areas of high density single-
family residential development and for low-density, multi-family residential
development. Dwellings in this district should have good access to all city
services and facilities.
 
1111.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Day-care home, type B.
   (c)   Duplex.
   (d)   Dwelling, multi-family low-rise.
   (e)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
   (f)   Family home.
 
1111.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Accessory apartment, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Dwelling, zero lot line or attached, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Nursing home, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Religious institution, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   Rooming house, provided the minimum lot area per rooming unit shall be
2725 square feet.
 
1111.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Bed and breakfast establishment when operated by the resident who also
is the owner.
   (b)   Cemetery or mausoleum, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Day-care center.
   (e)   Day-care home, type A.
   (f)   Group home.
   (g)   Halfway house, provided a maximum of eight (8) parolees shall reside
on the premises.
   (h)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (i)   School, generalized private instruction.
   (j)   Emergency housing, provided the minimum lot area shall be 750 square
feet for each permanent resident and 200 square feet times the maximum
permitted occupant load for guests.
   (k)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1111.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RS-8 district shall be permitted.  In
lieu of a 120-square foot storage building, there may be a storage building of
not more than 64-square feet for each apartment unit.  In addition, a storage
building for maintenance of the property by the owner of the lot shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1111.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1111.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development with two or more principal uses or buildings on a lot larger
than two (2) acres or with a multifamily dwelling or dwellings of more than 24
units regardless of the size of the lot shall be subject to the Special
Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1112
RM-20 Medium-Density, Multi-Family Residence District
 
1112.01   Purpose.
1112.02   Principal uses permitted.
1112.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1112.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1112.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1112.06   General provisions.
1112.07   Special provisions.
 
1112.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of medium-
density, low-rise multi-family housing in areas suitable for this density. 
This district is particularly well suited to locations adjacent to neighborhood
activity centers, but it should have good access to all city services and
facilities.
 
1112.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Dwelling, low-rise multi-family.
 
1112.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Accessory apartment, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Adult family home subject to the dimensional requirements of the RS-
8 district.
   (c)   Day-care home, type B, subject to the dimensional requirements of the
RS-8 district.
   (d)   Duplex, subject to the dimensional requirements of the RM-12 district
and provided the minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet and the minimum
lot area per unit shall be 2,000 square feet.
   (e)   Dwelling, single-family detached, subject to the dimensional
requirements of the RS-8 district.
   (f)   Dwelling, zero lot line or attached, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135 and the dimensional requirements of the RM-12 district and provided the
minimum lot area per unit shall be 1,800 square feet.
   (g)   Family home, subject to the dimensional requirements of the RS-
8 district.
   (h)   Fraternity/sorority house, provided the minimum lot area shall be 545
square feet times the maximum permitted occupant load.
   (i)   Nursing home, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (j)   Religious institution subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (k)   Rooming house, provided the minimum lot area per rooming unit shall be
2,000 square feet.
 
1112.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Adult family home.
   (b)   Bed and breakfast establishment when operated by the resident who also
is the owner.
   (c)   Cemetery or mausoleum, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   Day-care center.
   (f)   Day-care home, type A.
   (g)   Group home.
   (h)   Emergency housing, provided the minimum lot area shall be 500 square
feet for each permanent resident and 200 square feet times the maximum
permitted occupant load for guests.
   (i)   Halfway house, provided a maximum of eight (8) parolees shall reside
on the premises.
   (j)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (k)   School, generalized private instruction.
   (l)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1112.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RM-12 district shall be permitted.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1112.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1112.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development with two or more principal uses or buildings on a lot larger
than two (2) acres or with a multifamily dwelling or dwellings of more than 24
units regardless of the size of the lot shall be subject to the Special
Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1113
CN-2 Neighborhood Commerical District
 
1113.01   Purpose.
1113.02   Principal uses permitted.
1113.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1113.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1113.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1113.06   General provisions.
1113.07   Special provisions.
 
1113.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of
pedestrian-oriented uses that serve the small-scale retail, service, office,
and entertainment needs of one or more fully developed residential
neighborhoods, a residential area of approximately 5,000 to 15,000 persons.
Stores, offices and other businesses in this district should generally be
useful to the majority of the neighborhood residents within walking distance,
as well as the specially needs of the community as a whole.  Large-scale
grocery and retail are not appropriate uses. Small-scale retail, service, and
restaurant establishments should constitute the primary uses in this district.
The district is intended to accommodate a physical pattern of development often
found along village main streets and in neighborhood commercial areas of older
cities.
   This district also serves as a mixed-use transitional area between high
intensity central business district uses and residential uses.  Light
production, manufacturing, and assembly uses are permitted at appropriate
transitional areas as conditional uses.  Civic and neighborhood-oriented uses,
as well as some residential, should be secondary functions of buildings in this
district. All uses should be relatively nuisance-free to surrounding residents
and not detract from the residential purpose and character of the surrounding
neighborhood.  Access to this district should be directly from an arterial or
collector street.
(Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
1113.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Financial institution.
   (b)   Grocery store, including specialty foods such as bakery and
delicatessen goods (limited to maximum of 5,000 SF per store).
   (c)   Personal service establishment. (Ord. 14-113. Passed 5-13-14.)
   (d)   U.S. postal station.
   (e)   Videotape rental store.
   (f)   Copy service establishment.
   (g)   Meeting Hall.
   (h)   Optical, prosthetics, medical and dental supply store, limited to
retail sales.
   (i)   Pharmacy limited to the retail sale of drugs and pharmaceutical
products (limited to maximum of 5,000 SF per store).
   (j)   Museum and art gallery.
   (k)   Office use allowed in the CO-1 District.
   (l)   Retail establishment (including a restaurant, does not include a
drive-in restaurant), except those uses listed as conditional uses (limited to
maximum of 5,000 SF per business).
      (Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
1113.03 PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   (a)   Dwelling located above the ground floor of another principal use
allowed  in this district, provided the density shall not exceed one (1)
dwelling unit per 1,000 square feet of lot area for mixed-use buildings and
1,800 square feet for residential use buildings.
 
   (b)   Duplex, subject to the dimensional requirements of the RM-12 district
and provided the minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet and the minimum
lot area per unit shall be 2,000 square feet.
 
   (c)   Dwelling, single-family detached, subject to the dimensional
requirements of the RS-8 district.
 
   (d)   Dwelling, zero lot line or attached, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135 and the dimensional requirements of the RM-12 district and provided the
minimum lot area per unit shall be 1,800 square feet.
 
   (e)   Religious institution subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
1113.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Day-care center.
   (b)   Public utility and public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Emergency housing, provided the minimum lot area shall be at least 300
square feet for each permanent resident and 200 square feet times the maximum
permitted occupant load for guests.
   (d)   Laundromat.
   (e)   Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery services establishment.
   (f)   School, specialized or general private instruction.
   (g)   Commercial recreational use.
   (h)   Theater (limited to maximum of 5,000 SF total theater space per
building).
   (i)   Club
   (j)   Building construction and assembly.
   (k)   Communication station, center, and studio (not including a tower).
   (l)   Manufacture, compounding, processing, treatment assembling of articles
or components from previously prepared materials such as, but not limited to,
bone, canvas, cellophane, cement, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur,
glass, hair, horn, leather (except a tannery), metal, paper, plastics, precious
or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wire, wood (except logging camps, sawmills, and planing mills), and yarns.
   (m)   Wholesale trade and warehouse establishment.
   (n)   Retail establishment in excess of 5,000 square feet (including a
restaurant, does not include a drive-in restaurant).
   (o)   Manufacture, processing and packaging of food and kindred products
except grain milling and processing, stockyards and slaughter houses.
   (p)   Dwelling located on the ground floor of another principle use,
provided the density shall not exceed one (1) dwelling unit per 1,800 square
feet of lot area.
   (q)   Hotel.
   (r)   Parking, non-accessory.  All parking must be screening using urban
screening.  Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material.  Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10
percent opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10
feet.  The materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
      (Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
   (s)   Community center, subject to requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1113.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses permitted in this district may include but are not
limited to the following:
   (a)     Storage space for a principal use, provided the space shall not
exceed 40 percent of the total floor area for the principal use and all
accessory uses, including the storage space.
      (Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
1113.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
(Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
1113.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Development of a lot larger than two (2) acres shall be subject to the
Special Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
(Ord. 07-131. Passed 5-15-07.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1114
RM-44 High Density Multi-Family Residence District
 
1114.01   Purpose.
1114.02   Principal uses permitted.
1114.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1114.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1114.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1114.06   General provisions.
1114.07   Special provisions.
 
1114.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to establish areas for the development of
high density high-rise and low-rise multi-family dwellings and group living
quarters. Additionally, it is intended that this district be located near an
arterial street for proper access.  Due to the different types of uses
permitted within the district, careful attention to site design and development
is expected to assure that all uses are mutually compatible.
 
1114.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Day-care home, type B.
   (b)   Dwelling, low-rise multi-family.
 
1114.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Fraternity/sorority house, provided the minimum lot area shall be 330
square feet times the maximum permitted occupant load.
   (b)   Nursing home, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Religious institution, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Rooming house, provided the minimum lot area per rooming unit shall be
1000 square feet.
   (e)   Family home, subject to the dimensional requirements of the RS-
8 district.
   (f)   Adult Group Home, subject to the dimensional requirements of the RS-
8 district.
      (Ord. 04-71.  Passed 3-9-04.)
 
1114.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)     Adult group home, provided the minimum lot area shall be at least
300 square feet for each resident.
   (b)   Bed and breakfast establishment when operated by the resident who also
is the owner.
   (c)   Dwelling, high-rise multi-family, subject to the requirements of
Subsection
1151.01(b) and provided that the lot shall have frontage upon an arterial
street identified on the Land Use Plan map.
   (d)   Club, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   Day-care center.
   (f)   Day-care home, type A.
   (g)   Emergency housing, provided the minimum lot area shall be 300 square
feet for each permanent resident and 200 square feet times the maximum
permitted occupant load for guests.
   (h)   Group home, provided the minimum lot area shall be at least 300 square
feet each resident.
   (i)   Halfway house, provided a maximum of eight (8) parolees shall reside
on the premises.
   (j)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (k)   Retail and service establishments listed as permitted uses in the CN-
1 district, provided they are located on the ground level or below in a high-
rise multi-family dwelling.
   (l)   School, generalized and specialty private instruction.
      (Ord. 06-442.  Passed 12-19-06.)
   (m)   Community Center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 04-14-09.)
 
1114.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RM-12 district shall be permitted.
(Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1114.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1114.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development with two or more principal uses or buildings on a lot larger
than two (2) acres or with a multifamily dwelling or dwellings of more than 24
units regardless of the size of the lot shall be subject to the Special
Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1115
RM-44A High-Density, Multi-Use District
 
1115.01   Purpose.
1115.02   Principal uses permitted.
1115.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1115.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1115.05   Accessory uses and structures permitted.
1115.06   General provisions.
 
1115.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to allow for the incremental development of
agricultural land to residential property.  The minimum size of an RM-44A
District shall be 150 acres.
 
1115.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Any use or structure permitted in the A, RS-5, RS-8, RM-12, RM-20, or
RM-44 districts, provided that any structure more than three stories in height
shall be located at least 200 feet from any lot line.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1115.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Any provisional use or structure permitted in the A or RM-44
districts.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1115.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Any conditional use or structure permitted in the A or RM-44
districts.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1115.05  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the A and RM-44 districts shall be
permitted.
   (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1115.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1116
CO-1 Commercial Office District
 
1116.01   Purpose.
1116.02   Principal uses permitted.
1116.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1116.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1116.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1116.06   General provisions.
1116.07   Special provisions.
 
1116.01  PURPOSE.
   The Commercial Office District (CO-1) is intended to provide specific areas
where office uses, compatible businesses, apartments, and certain public and
semi-public uses may be developed.  The CO-1 District is useful as a
transitional zone between residential and more intensive commercial or
industrial areas.  Access to this district should be directly from an arterial
or collector street and not through a residential district.
 
1116.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Club.
   (b)   Copy service establishment.
   (c)   Hospital.
   (d)   Meeting Hall.
   (e)   Nursing home.
   (f)   Office use, except for the following:
      (1)   Drive-in facility.
      (2)   Animal clinic.
   (g)   Optical, prosthetics, medical and dental supply store, limited to
retail sales.
   (h)   Pharmacy limited to the retail sale of drugs and pharmaceutical
products.
   (j)   Photographic studio.
   (k)   Financial institution.
   (l)   Family home.
      (Ord. 03-245.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
1116.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Barber shop and styling salon when located within the same building of
a principal use and having its access to the main entrance or to a central
corridor of the building.
   (b)   Dwelling located above the ground floor of another principal use
allowed  in this district, provided the density shall not exceed one (1)
dwelling unit per 1,800 square feet of lot area.
   (c)   Florist shop when located within the same building of a principal use
and having its access to the main entrance or to a central corridor of the
building.
   (d)   Religious institution subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 05-238.  Passed 9-20-05.)
 
1116.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Communication station and studio subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135.  No communication tower may be located on the same lot with a station or
studio.
   (b)   Day-care center.
   (c)   Drive-in facility associated with a financial institution.
   (d)   Emergency housing, provided the minimum lot area shall be at least 300
square feet for each permanent resident and 200 square feet times the maximum
permitted occupant load for guests.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
   (e)   Funeral home subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (f)   Group care facility, provided the minimum lot area shall be at least
300 square feet for each occupant.
   (g)   Helipad or helistop in conjunction with a hospital.
   (h)   Laundromat.
   (i)   Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery services establishment.
   (j)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (k)   Restaurant (does not include a drive-in restaurant).
   (l)   Retail sale of merchandise as an accessory use in conjunction with an
office of a professional person, provided the retail floor areas shall not
exceed 10 percent of the total floor area.  The areas of the retail floor area
shall include all that space of a room or rooms in which merchandise is
displayed.
   (m)   School, specialized private instruction.
   (n)   Museum together with specific, approved, related commercial operations
to serve museum patrons (such as, by way of example, a museum store).
   (o)   Art gallery together with specific, approved, related commercial
operations to serve art gallery patrons (such as, by way of example, retail
sale of art and framing studio.)
   (p)   Personal services establishment.
      (Ord. 05-238.  Passed 9-20-05; Ord. 14-113. Passed 5-13-14.)
   (q)    Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
 
1116.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   (a)   Nonresidential uses.  For nonresidential uses permitted in this
district, there may be any accessory use provided that:
      (1)   Fences are erected according to Chapter
1156.
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading are provided according to Chapters
1153.
      (3)   Retail sale of merchandise shall be regulated as provided in
Section
1116.04 above.
      (4)   Signs are erected according to Chapter
1155.
      (5)   Storage space shall not exceed 40 percent of the total floor area.
 
   (b)   Residential uses.  For residential uses permitted in this district,
the accessory uses as regulated in the RM-44 District, Chapter
1114, shall be permitted.
 
1116.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1116.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development of a lot larger than two (2) acres shall be subject to the
Special Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1117
CN-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
 
1117.01   Purpose.
1117.02   Principal uses permitted.
1117.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1117.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1117.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1117.06   General provisions.
1117.07   Special provisions.
 
1117.01  PURPOSE.
The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of uses which
meet the day-to-day needs of one or more fully developed residential
neighborhoods, a residential area of approximately 5,000 to 15,000 persons.
Stores, offices and other businesses in this district should be useful to the
majority of the neighborhood residents and be economically supported by the
residents and not by the community as a whole.  A grocery store or grocery
store/drugstore combination is favored as the principal tenant in this
district.  All uses should be relatively nuisance-free to surrounding residents
and not detract from the residential purpose and character of the surrounding
neighborhood.  Access to this district should be directly from an arterial or
collector street and not through a residential district.
 
1117.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Bakery, limited to the retail sale of goods produced on premises.
   (b)   Financial institution.
   (c)   Gift shop.
   (d)   Grocery store, including specialty foods such as bakery and
delicatessen goods.
   (e)     Personal service establishment.
      (Ord. 14-113. Passed 5-13-14.)
   (f)     U.S. postal station.
   (g)     Videotape rental store.
 
1117.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
None.
 
1117.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)     Day-care center.
   (b)     Drive-in facility for a financial institution.
   (c)     Drugstore, including the sale of a variety of goods, provided the
total floor area shall not exceed 20,000 square feet.
   (d)     Filling station, provided no part of the operation, including drives
and other ancillary spaces, shall be located within 100 feet of a R district
boundary.
   (e)   Game room.
   (f)   Office, provided:
      (1)     No office use shall occupy more than 1,800 square feet of floor
area;
      (2)     The floor area of all office uses within an area zoned CN-1 shall
not exceed 15 percent of the total floor area within the district;
      (3)     The location of a building for an office use shall be located as
not to diminish convenient access to retail and other businesses located on a
lot or separate tract.
   (g)     Public utility and public use, subject to the requirements of
Chapter
1135.
   (h)     Restaurant (including a drive-in restaurant).
   (i)     School, specialized private instruction.
   (j)   Service station with grocery sales with or without a drive-thru or
pick-up window showing specific site plans for the proposed use.  The
determination by the Board to permit such use shall specify that the setback
from adjacent R districts shall not be less than 100 feet unless the Board
finds that a lesser setback requirement together with such fencing, landscape,
and land use, as shall be required by such Board, will provide the necessary
protection and screening to adjacent R districts.  In no event, however, shall
such setback be less than fifty (50) feet from any lot in an R district and it
shall apply to the principal structure and any portion of the property used in
conjunction with the principal use.  In its findings, the Board shall require
an appropriate agreement for maintenance of any landscaping and/or fencing
required by the Board.
 
1117.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses permitted in this district may include but are not
limited to the following:
   (a)     Storage space for a principal use, provided the space shall not
exceed 40 percent of the total floor area for the principal use and all
accessory uses, including the storage space.
 
1117.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1117.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   In no instance shall an area zoned CN-1 be less than two (2) acres nor
more than 10 acres.  (For purposes of this requirement, the total area shall
include the area of all contiguous tracts of land and all tracts of land
separated by streets.  The area of all streets included within or separating
tracts of land within the district shall be excluded).
 
   (b)   Development of a lot larger than two (2) acres shall be subject to the
Special Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1118
CC-2 Community Commercial District
 
1118.01   Purpose.
1118.02   Principal uses permitted.
1118.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1118.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1118.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1118.06   General provisions.
1118.07   Special provisions.
 
1118.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide locations for the development of
community shopping and business areas which serve a major segment of the
community population.  In addition to a variety of retail goods and services,
these areas may typically feature a number of large traffic generators that
require access to major thoroughfares.  While these areas are usually
characterized by indoor operations, certain permitted uses may have limited
outdoor activities as specified.  Access to this district should be directly
from an arterial or collector street and not through a residential district.
 
1118.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following permitted uses:
   (a)   Business service establishment, except a drive- in facility.
   (b)   Club.
   (c)   Food locker.
   (d)   Meeting hall.
   (e)   Museum and art gallery.
   (f)   Office use allowed in the CO-1 District.
   (g)   Personal service establishment, except a drive- in facility.
      (Ord. 14-113. Passed 5-13-14.)
   (h)   Retail establishment (including a restaurant), except those uses
listed as conditional uses.
   (i)   Theater.
   (j)   Financial Institution.
   (k)   Hotel or motel.
      (Ord. 06-217.  Passed 6-13-06.)
 
1118.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   None.
 
1118.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Animal specialty service, veterinary clinic, and animal hospital. 
Such uses shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The facility shall have no outside runs.
      (2)   Animals shall not be housed outside nor shall cages be stored
outside.
      (3)   The building housing the facility shall be sound proofed to
minimized the transmission of sound outside the walls of the building. A
minimum sound transmission coefficient of 40 shall be maintained.
      (4)   All facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner
so as to prevent the emission of noxious or offensive odors.
   (5)   The facility shall be limited to the care of small domestic animals.
   (b)   Automobile and truck oriented use.
   (c)   Cemetery.
   (d)   Day-care center.
   (e)   Commercial recreational use.
   (f)   Dwelling located above the ground floor of another principal use
allowed in this district, provided the density does not exceed one (1) dwelling
unit per 1,800 square feet of lot area.
   (g)   Funeral home subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (h)   Public utility or public use.
   (i)   Religious institution.
   (j)   School, specialized private instruction.
   (k)   Emergency housing, provided there shall be at least 300 square feet of
lot area for each permanent resident and 200 square feet for each guest.
   (l)   Drive-in facility for a financial institution.
   (m)   Mini-warehouse or self-storage facilities subject to the following
requirements:
      (i)   Such mini-warehouse or self-storage facilities must be located at
the rear of a lot used for other CC-2 purposes.
      (ii)   The lot on which such use is permitted must have frontage on a
thoroughfare as the same is shown on the adopted Thoroughfare Plan of The City
of Springfield, Ohio, and entrance and exit to such use shall be from such
thoroughfare.
      (iii)   All drives and parking areas serving the use shall have a paved
surface such as asphalt, concrete, or like material.
      (iv)   Any such use on a lot located within 150 feet of or abutting a lot
having a residential use in an R district shall be screened in accordance with
the requirements of Section
1161.02(h) of this Zoning Code.
      (v)   There shall be one (1) off-street parking space for each 3,000
square feet of storage and such off-street parking shall be subject to Section
1158.02(b) of this Zoning Code.
   (n)   Community Center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
      (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1118.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses permitted in this district may include but are not
limited to the following:
   (a)   Storage space, provided the space shall not exceed 40 percent of the
total floor area for the principal use and storage area.
 
1118.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1118.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development of a lot or separate tract larger than two (2) acres shall be
subject to the Special Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1119
EC-1 Educational Campus District
 
1119.01   Purpose.
1119.02   Principal uses permitted.
1119.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1119.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1119.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1119.06   General provisions.
1119.07   Special provisions.
 
1119.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to establish appropriate areas for the
development of educational campuses.
 
1119.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Any use or structure permitted in the RM-20 district and as
hereinafter modified, except halfway houses.
      (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
   (b)   Institutional structures owned by a college or university and used for
academic and related purposes, including the recreation, housing and feeding of
students and guests of the college or university.
      (1)   Such structures shall front either on a public street or permanent
open public space or on a common yard or outer court or private court or
private drive, which drive is paved to a width of at least twenty (20) feet if
two-way, or twelve (12) feet if one-way.  The aforementioned yards, courts, or
open spaces shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet in width and every
structure facing such shall be within fifty (50) feet of a public street or a
private drive (minimum dimensions listed above).
      (2)   Such structures abutting on a street designated as primary or
secondary on the Thoroughfare Plan shall have a setback of twenty-five (25)
feet or to any other established line, whichever is less. On streets not so
designated as primary or secondary where the college or university erecting the
structure owns property for a distance of 100 feet along one (1) side of the
street right of way on both sides of the property to be built upon, or owns all
of the street frontage within the block along the side of the street to be
built upon, the front yard setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet for
fifty percent (50%) of the site along any on (1) street.  On the remaining
fifty percent (50%) of such frontage, the structure may project to the street
right of way.  Where the college or university does not own the above-sited
frontages, a setback of twenty (20) feet along the front yard and fifteen (15)
feet along the street side line of a corner lot shall be required.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
      (3)   There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet maintained
between such structures and twenty-five (25) feet, or one-half (1/2) the height
of the institutional structure, whichever is greater, between such structures
and noninstitutional structures.
      (4)   There shall be provided for or available to each such structure,
hereafter erected, off- street parking facilities as follows:
         A.   One (1) parking space, as hereinafter defined, for every six (6)
students, which structure is designed to serve at any one (1) time, except that
in the case of stadiums, sports arenas, theaters, churches and other places of
assembly open to the public, one (1) parking space shall be provided or
available for each ten (10) seats, counting as one (1) seat each twenty (20)
inches of seating facilities where pews, benches or similar seating facilities
are employed.  Where the number of parking spaces is determined by the student
capacity, as set forth above, then in the event the college or university does
not permit over twenty-five percent (25%) of the student body to operate and
own motor vehicles, the number of parking spaces required shall be determined
as follows:
            (i)   One (1) parking space for each faculty member and other
employee of the university or college.  Duplication of parking facilities shall
not be required in connection with the erection of several such structures,
provided such parking facilities are available within the distance prescribed
in subsection (b)(4)C. hereof.
         B.   Each off-street parking space must meet the requirements of
Section
1153.05.  Parking spaces available along private streets or roads which do not
obstruct traffic shall be considered as qualifying for off-street parking.
            (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
         C.   Off-street parking facilities shall be within 1,600 feet of the
structure they are to serve and shall be of a permanent type, except that in
the case of stadiums or sports arenas such facilities may be of a temporary
nature if on an open field owned by the college or university owning the
stadium or sports arena served.
      (5)   Wherever the provisions of this section are inconsistent with those
of any other more restrictive section, the provisions thereof shall govern.
 
1119.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   The provisional uses as regulated in the RM-20 district shall be permitted.
 
1119.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   The conditional uses as regulated in the RM-20 district shall be permitted,
with the exception that halfway houses shall not be permitted in this district.
 
1119.05  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses as regulated in the RM-12 district shall be permitted.
 
1119.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Titles Four,
Five, and
Six.
 
1119.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1120
CB-10 Central Business District
 
1120.01   Purpose.
1120.02   Principal uses permitted.
1120.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1120.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1120.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1120.06   General provisions.
1120.07   Special provisions.
 
1120.01  PURPOSE.
   The Central Business District is intended to be the high intensity, compact,
pedestrian oriented shopping, office, service, and entertainment area of the
community. Development and redevelopment within this district should be compact
to intensify usable commercial spaces while increasing the availability of open
spaces, plazas, or pedestrian ways.  The district is intended to accommodate a
wide range of retail, office, and service uses.  Automobile and truck oriented
uses, as defined in this code, are not permitted except as otherwise provided. 
Consolidated off- street loading and service facilities should be provided
wherever practical with access to be provided from public service alleys or
courts.  It is intended that on-street parking facilities be publicly provided
and off-street accessory parking be allowed only as a conditional use.
Residential development above the ground floor in this district is encouraged
as a provisional use.
 
1120.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Business service establishment, except a drive-in facility.
   (b)   Hotel and motel.
   (c)   Meeting hall.
   (d)   Office use allowed in the CO-1 district.
   (e)   Personal service establishment, except a drive-in facility.
   (f)   Museum and art gallery.
   (g)   Retail establishment other than a drive-in facility.
   (h)   Theater.
   (i)   Financial institution.
   (j)   Restaurant.
   (k)   Dwelling, Single-Family Attached.
      (Ord. 18-209. Passed 8-14-18.)
 
1120.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Residential development above the ground floor.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
   (b)   Microbottler, provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The production and packaging area shall not exceed 15,000 square
feet.
      (2)   Microbottlers shall provide a tap room of at least 500 square feet
that is oriented to the street or main pedestrian entrance of the building.
      (3)   The tap room shall be open for business at least ten (10) hours
each week.
         (Ord. 15-41. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1120.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Day-care center.
   (b)   Club.
   (c)   Commercial recreational use.
   (d)   Drive-in facility for a financial institution.
   (e)   Off-street parking and loading subject to the provisions of Chapters
1153.
   (f)   Public utility or public use subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (g)   Religious institution.
   (h)   School, specialized private instruction.
   (i)   Community center, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
 
1120.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   The accessory uses permitted in this district may include but are not
limited to the following:
   (a)   Storage space, provided the space shall not exceed 40 percent of the
total floor area for the principal use and storage area.
 
1120.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1120.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1121
CH-1 Highway Commercial District
 
1121.01   Purpose.
1121.02   Principal uses permitted.
1121.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1121.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1121.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1121.06   General provisions.
1121.07   Special provisions.
 
1121.01  PURPOSE.
   The Highway Commercial District (CH-1) is intended for the location of uses
which cater to the motoring public. Accordingly, this district is appropriate
in locations along highways, expressways or other major thoroughfares.
 
1121.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Automobile and truck-oriented use
   (b)   Commercial recreational facility
   (c)   Community center
   (d)   Daycare center
   (e)   Financial institution
   (f)   Hotel or motel
   (g)   Office
   (h)   Restaurant
   (i)   Retail
   (j)   Theater
   (k)   Wholesale trade and warehouse establishment
      (Ord. 16-101. Passed 4-12-16.)
 
1121.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   None.
 
1121.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Public utility or public use.
   (b)   School, specialized private instruction.
   (c)   Used merchandise store, including an antique store and flea market. 
Small new items such as trinkets may be sold in conjunction with used
merchandise up to 50 percent of gross sales.
      (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
1121.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   There may be any accessory use.
 
1121.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1121.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Development of a lot or separate tract larger than two (2) acres shall be
subject to the Special Provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1122
CI-1 Intensive Commercial District
 
1122.01   Purpose.
1122.02   Principal uses permitted.
1122.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1122.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1122.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1122.06   General provisions.
1122.07   Special provisions.
 
1122.01  PURPOSE.
   The Intensive Commercial District (CI-1) is intended to provide areas for
those sales and service functions and businesses whose operations are typically
characterized by outdoor display, storage and/or sale of merchandise, by repair
of motor vehicles, by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational activities,
and by activities or operations conducted in buildings or structures not
completely enclosed.  Special attention must be directed toward buffering the
negative aspects of these uses upon any residential use.  Access to this
district should be directly from an arterial or collector street and not
through a residential district.
 
1122.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Automobile and truck oriented use.
   (b)   Club.
   (c)   Carpet and rug cleaning establishment.
   (d)   Contractor, special trade--office, yard, and pre-assembly yard.
   (e)   Consignment shop.
   (f)   Equipment rental agency.
   (g)   Farm implement dealer.
   (h)   Floor covering store.
   (i)   Hardware and building supply store.
   (j)   Lumber yard.
   (k)   Marine equipment and supply.
   (l)   Meeting hall.
   (m)   Museum and art gallery.
   (n)   Office use allowed in the CO-1 District.
   (o)   Plant nursery and florist shop.
   (p)   Repair shop.
   (q)   Restaurant.
   (r)   Storage building.
   (s)   Storage for commercial vehicles and equipment.
   (t)   Personal service establishment.
      (Ord. 14-113. Passed 5-13-14.)
   (u)   Wholesale trade and warehouse establishment.
 
1122.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Funeral home subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (b)   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital, provided they shall comply with
the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (c)   Manufacturing use engaged in light manufacturing, including
compounding, assembly and/or processing of articles, provided:
      (1)   The floor area of the principal use shall not exceed 5,000 square
feet,
      (2)   The lot on which the use is located shall not be contiguous to a
lot with a use owned or operated by the same person,
      (3)   A person intending to establish such use can demonstrate compliance
with the performance standards of Chapter
1161 through certification by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified person, and
      (4)   The following uses shall be prohibited:
         A.   Chemicals and allied products, manufacture of.
         B.   Disposal, reduction or dumping of dead animals or offal.
         C.   Explosives, manufacture of.
         D.   Grain processing.
         E.   Leather tanning.
         F.   Meat packing.
         G.   Radioactive waste storage or disposal.
         H.   Rubber and plastics, manufacture of.
         I.   Sawmills.
   (d)   Retail establishment, other than listed, when associated with the uses
allowed in this district and provided that not more than 40 percent of the
total ground floor area shall be devoted to the retail display of merchandise.
 
1122.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Sexually oriented business provided it shall not be located within 500
feet of an R district, public park, religious institution, or school nor within
100 feet from a bar, cocktail lounge or tavern or another sexually oriented
business.  No alcoholic beverage shall be served on the premises.
(Ord. 19-85.  Passed 3-26-19.)
   (b)   Commercial recreational use.
   (c)   Dwelling located above the ground floor of another principal use
permitted in this district, provided the density shall not exceed one (1)
dwelling unit per 1,800 square feet of lot area.
   (d)   Manufacturing use engaged in light manufacturing, including
compounding, assembly and/or processing of articles, where the floor area of
the principal use exceeds 5,000 square feet but not more than 15,000 square
feet.
   (e)   Laundry, cleaning, and garment services, including dry-cleaning
plants, carpet and upholstery cleaning establishments, and other uses listed in
Industry Group 721 of the Standard Manufacturing Classification Manual.
   (f)   Public utility or public use.
   (g)   Schools, specialized private instruction.
 
1122.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   Any accessory use shall be permitted.
 
1122.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1122.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1123
Research and Development Park District (RDP)
 
1123.01   Purpose.
1123.02   Principal uses permitted.
1123.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1123.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1123.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1123.06   General provisions.
1123.07   Special provisions.
 
1123.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide areas for the location of office
and research facilities in conjunction with production and/or assembly of
prototype products.  The requirements of this district are intended to provide
protection from the adverse impacts of uses within the district upon adjacent
properties.  The types of uses permitted within this district with the
restrictions placed upon them make this district suitable for location near
residential districts.  Access to this district should be directly from an
arterial or collector street and not through a residential district. Hotels,
motels and similar uses should be located peripheral to the district or in
other locations that do not adversely effect the setting and quality of the
uses within the district.
 
1123.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Data processing and computer operation.
   (b)   Merchandise and product display center, but not including the retail
sale of merchandise.
   (c)   Office use allowed in the CO-1 district.
   (d)   Research, testing and experimental laboratory.
 
1123.03  PROVISIONAL USES.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Manufacture and assembly of a prototype established in conjunction
with and not exceeding the area of a research, testing and experimental
laboratory.
   (b)   Warehousing, storage and distribution facility established in
conjunction with and not exceeding the area of a principal use listed in this
district.
 
1123.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Communication station, center, studio or tower, subject to the
requirements of Chapter
1136.
   (b)   Day-care center, provided it is located within the building of another
principal use listed in this district.
   (c)   Heliport and helistop, provided it is not located within one-quarter
(1/4) mile of an R district.
   (d)   Hotel, motel, and convention center and a restaurant in association
with these uses.
   (e)   Public utility or public use, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (f)   School, generalized and specialized private instruction above the 12th
grade level.
 
1123.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   There may be any accessory use.
 
1123.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1123.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   In no instance shall an area zoned RDP be less than 10 acres.
 
   (b)   A request to rezone land to an RDP district shall be accompanied by a
plan for development of the park, meeting the procedural requirements of
Chapter
1174 and accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A conceptual master plan for the park showing, at a minimum, the
following:
         A.   Size of the tract to be rezoned and developed as a research and
development park.
         B.   Existing topographic features of the land, including drainage
ways, wooded areas and contours.
         C.   General location of uses, with a minimum of 60 percent of the
park area designated for office and/or research uses.
         D.   General location of any public uses, if any.
         E.   Traffic circulation patterns within the park.
         F.   Methods of buffering the research park from adjacent uses.
         G.   General treatment of signage for entrance ways to the park.
         H.   An illustration of entrances to the park.
         I.   Anticipated accommodation for stormwater management.
         J.   Means of waste disposal.
      (2)   Development standards for the particular park addressing such
things as the use of building materials, fencing, lighting, landscaping,
outside storage, setbacks and lot coverage to ensure compatibility of design
within the research park and to minimize the adverse effects of the development
of one lot on another.  The development standards may fulfill, in part,
features of the conceptual master plan and shall become part of the restrictive
covenants of the park.
 
   (c)  The conceptual master plan is intended to be a guide for the
development of a research development park. Building permits requested for
construction within the park shall be evaluated by the Community Development
Director or his designee for compliance with the guidelines of the master plan
and the requirements of the development standards.  Permit applications which
do not meet the guidelines of the plan and the requirements of the standards
shall be denied.  Amendment of the plan and/or standards shall require
amendment of the ordinance zoning the park, pursuant to Chapter
1174.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1124
M-1 General Manufacturing District
 
1124.01   Purpose.
1124.02   Principal uses permitted.
1124.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1124.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1124.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1124.06   General provisions.
1124.07   Special provisions.
 
1124.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of most types
of manufacturing firms and related uses.  Regulations are designed to protect
adjacent residential and non-manufacturing districts.  Access to this district
should be directly from an arterial or collector street and not through a
residential district.
 
1124.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Building construction and assembly.
   (b)   Club, limited to use by a labor union.
   (c)   Communication station, center, and studio (not including a tower).
   (d)   Manufacture, compounding, processing, treatment and assembling of
articles or components from previously prepared materials such as but not
limited to bone, canvas, cellophane, cement, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather (except a tannery), metal, paper,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber, shells, textiles,
tobacco, wax, wire, wood (except logging camps, sawmills, and planing mills),
and yarns.
   (e)   Manufacture of chemicals and allied products, except fertilizer
manufacturing and alcohol plants.
   (f)   Manufacture, processing and packaging of food and kindred products
except grain milling and processing, stockyards and slaughter houses.
   (g)   Printing and publishing establishment.
   (h)   Railroad switching, storage, freight yard and maintenance facility.
   (i)   Truck maintenance facility, including truck repair, fueling and
washing.
   (j)   Truck transfer facility, not including solid waste transfer.
   (k)   Research, testing and experimental laboratory.
   (l)   Wholesale trade and warehouse establishment.
 
1124.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   (a)   Communication tower, subject to the requirements of Chapter
1136.
   (b)   Residence of the proprietor, caretaker or watchman when located on the
premises of the commercial or manufacturing use.
 
1124.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Cementitious concrete batch/mix plant.
   (b)   Heliport and helistop.
   (c)   Public utility or public use.
   (d)   School, specialized private instruction.
   (e)     Solid waste transfer station (except a rock or aggregate crushing or
recycling plant), provided the operation is totally enclosed within a building.
(Ord. 06-375.  Passed 10-17-06.)
   (f)   Sexually oriented business, provided it shall not be located within
500 feet of an R district, public park, religious institutions, or school nor
within 100 feet from a bar, cocktail lounge or tavern or another sexually
oriented business.  No alcoholic beverage shall be served on the premises.
(Ord. 19-85.  Passed 3-26-19.)
   (g)   Automobile-oriented use.
      (Ord. 06-375.  Passed 10-17-06.)
 
1124.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   There may be any accessory use.
 
1124.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1124.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1125
M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District
 
1125.01   Purpose.
1125.02   Principal uses permitted.
1125.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1125.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1125.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1125.06   General provisions.
1125.07   Special provisions.
 
1125.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for heavy or intense industries
and related uses.  The district is designed primarily for manufacturing uses
and activities which have external effects which could have an impact on
adjacent less intense uses.  Access to this district should be directly from an
arterial or collector street and not through a residential district.
 
1125.02  PERMITTED USES.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Any manufacturing use not listed as a provisional or conditional use
in this district, except the following uses which shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Demolition dump.
      (2)   Disposal, reduction or dumping of dead animals or offal.
      (3)   Explosives manufacturing.
      (4)   Fertilizer manufacturing.
      (5)   Paper mill.
      (6)   Production of Portland cement.
      (7)   Radioactive waste storage or disposal site.
   (b)   Public utility or public use.
 
1125.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following provisional uses:
   None.
 
1125.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be used for the following conditional uses:
   (a)   Alcohol plant.
   (b)   Animal food plant.
   (c)   Extraction subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (d)   Salvage yard subject to the requirements of Chapter
1135.
   (e)   Production of stone, clay, and glass material.
   (f)   Rock and aggregate crushing and recycling plant.
   (g)   Stockyard or slaughter house.
   (h)   Tannery. (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
   (i)   Sexually oriented business, provided it shall not be located within
500 feet of an R district, public park, religious institutions, or school nor
within 100 feet from a bar, cocktail lounge or tavern or another sexually
oriented business.  No alcoholic beverage shall be served on the premises.
(Ord. 19-85.  Passed 3-26-19.)
 
1125.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   There may be any accessory use.
 
1125.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1125.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1126
G Green Space, Park, and School District
 
1126.01   Purpose.
1126.02   Principal uses permitted.
1126.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1126.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1126.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1126.06   Dimensional requirements.
1126.07   General provisions.
1126.08   Special provisions.
 
1126.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide and maintain lands for open space
and for essential public service.
 
1126.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   A lot or building may be occupied by the following principal uses:
   (a)   Open space in any form of undeveloped land.
   (b)    Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas.
   (c)   Public service facilities or specific uses that are determined by the
City Commission to be necessary or incidental to the operation of the City or
any of its departments.
   (d)   Schools.
 
1126.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   None.
 
1126.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   None.
 
1126.05  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED.
   There may by any accessory use.
 
1126.06  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
   None.
 
1126.07  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Any development of land under this section shall be approved by the City
Commission after recommendation of the Planning Board having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
1126.08  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1127
OFP Flood Plain Overlay District
 
1127.01   Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose and objectives.
1127.02   Definitions.
1127.03   General provisions.
1127.04   Administration.
1127.05   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
1127.06   Board of Zoning Appeals and variance procedure.
 
1127.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (a)   Statutory authorization.  ARTICLE XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio
Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and
control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens.  Therefore, the City Commission of the City of Springfield, State of
Ohio, does ordain as follows:
 
   (b)   Findings of fact. 
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   Uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
 
   (c)   Statement of purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed
to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
 
   (d)   Methods of reducing flood losses.  In order to accomplish its
purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and,
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
 
1127.02  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   (a)   (1)   Accessory structure means a structure on the same lot with and
of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
      (2)   Appeal means a request for review of the Community Development
Director or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a
request for a variance.
      (3)   Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
      (4)   Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Areas of special flood hazard are designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1 30, and A99.
   (b)   (1)   Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.  The base flood may also be referred to
as the one hundred (100) year flood.
      (2)   Basement means any area of the building having its floor (below
ground level) on all sides.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   (1)   Development means any man made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or storage of equipment or materials.
   (e)   Reserved.
   (f)   (1)   Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the agency with
the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance
Program.
      (2)   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
         (A)   the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
         (B)   the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      (3)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
      (4)   Flood Insurance Study means the official report in which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, and floodway boundaries, and the water
surface elevations of the base flood.
      (5)   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1)
foot.
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   (1)   Historic structure means any structure that is:
         (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
         (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (C)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
         (D)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places
maintained by the City of Springfield whose historic preservation program has
been certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (i)   Reserved.
   (j)   Reserved.
   (k)   Reserved.
   (l)   (1)   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements
specified in this chapter for enclosures below the lowest floor.
   (m)   (1)   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities.  The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
      (2)   Manufactured home park means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent.  This definition
shall exclude any manufactured home park as defined in Section 3733.01 of the
Ohio Revised Code, for which the Ohio Public Health Council has exclusive rule
making power.
      (3)   Manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale. 
This definition shall exclude any manufactured home park as defined in Section
3733.01 of the Ohio Revised Code, for which the Ohio Public Health Council has
exclusive rule making power.
   (n)   (1)   New construction means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City's
Flood Insurance Rate Map, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
   (o)   Reserved.
   (p)   Reserved.
   (q)   Reserved.
   (r)   (1)   Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (A) built on a
single chassis, (B) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, (C) designed to be self- propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and (D) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
   (s)   (1)   Start of construction means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
      (2)   Structure means a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
      (3)   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.  Substantial damage also means flood related damage
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
      (4)   Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
The term does not, however, include:
         (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
         (B)   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure"; or
         (C)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction.
   (t)   Reserved.
   (u)   Reserved.
   (v)   (1)   Variance means a grant of relief from the standards of this
chapter consistent with the variance conditions herein.
      (2)   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with this chapter.
 
1127.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Lands to which this chapter applies.  This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of  the City as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency referenced in Section
1127.03(b), including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by
the City.
 
   (b)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.  The areas
of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Springfield, Ohio."  This study, with
accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated December 3, 1987, and, for areas annexed by the City, the "Flood
Insurance Study for Clark County, Ohio (Unincorporated areas)," with
accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated July 2, 1987.  These studies and maps, and any revisions thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.  The
Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Community Development Department, 76
East High Street, Springfield, Ohio.
 
   (c)   Compliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered 
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless
specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in Section
1127.04(b).
 
   (d)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.  This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions.  However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
 
   (e)   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body to accomplish
the regulation's intended purpose; and,
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter is in conflict with a state
law, such state law shall take precedence over the chapter.
 
   (f)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.  The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
 
1127.04  ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Establishment of development permit.  A Development Permit shall be
obtained from the Director of Community Development or his designee before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in Section
1127.03(b). Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Director of Community Development and may include, but not be
limited to:  site specific topographic plans drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing.  The following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all proposed structures located in areas of special
flood hazard where base flood elevation data are utilized from any source;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed in accordance with Section
1127.05(b)(2) where base flood elevation data are utilized from any source;
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section
1127.05(b)(2) where base flood elevation data are utilized from any source;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse will not be diminished.
      (5)   Certification by a registered professional engineer, architect, or
surveyor of the structure's as-built lowest floor or floodproofed elevation.
 
   (b)   Exemption from filing a development permit.  An application for a
Development Permit shall not be required for maintenance work such as roofing,
painting, and basement sealing, or for small nonstructural development
activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than $1,000.  Any
proposed action exempt from filing for a Development Permit is also exempt from
the standards of this chapter.
 
   (c)   Designation of the flood damage prevention chapter administrator.  The
Community Development Director or his designee is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
 
   (d)   Duties and responsibilities of the Community Development Director or
his designee.  The duties and responsibilities of the Director of Community
Development or his designee shall include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Permit review.
         (A)   Review all development permit applications to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
         (B)   Review all development permit applications and all other
necessary permits submitted which have been received from those federal, state
or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.  The
applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits as required including
permits issued by the Department of the Army under Section 10 of the Rivers and
Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
         (C)   Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development is located within a designated floodway.  Floodways are
delineated in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate
Map of the Flood Insurance Study.  Floodways may also be delineated in other
sources of flood information.  If the proposed development is located within a
designated floodway, assure that the encroachment provision of Section
1127.05(c)(1) is met.
         (D)   Inspect all development projects before, during, and after
construction to ensure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Use of other base flood elevation and floodway data.  Areas of
special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in accordance with Section
1127.03(b) are designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.  Within
these areas, the Community Development Director shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data obtained under Section
1127.05(b)(6) in order to administer Section
1127.05(b)(1) and (2); and where floodway data are available, administer
Section
1127.05(c).
      (3)   Information to be obtained and maintained by the City.  Where base
flood elevation data are utilized within areas of special flood hazard on the
City's or the County's Flood Insurance Rate Map, regardless of the source of
such data, the Community Development Director or his designee shall:
         (A)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially
improved structures, and record whether or not such structures contain an
enclosure below the lowest floor;
         (B)   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
nonresidential structures:
            (i)   obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and,
            (ii)   maintain the floodproofing certification required in Section
1127.04(a)(3).
         (C)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter, including base flood elevation data, Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, variance
documentation, Conditional Letters of Map Revision, Letters of Map Revision,
Letters of Map Amendment, and as-built elevations.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourses.
         (A)   Notify adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  A watercourse is
considered to be altered if any change occurs within its banks.
         (B)   Maintain engineering documentation required in Section
1127.04(a)(4) that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse will not be diminished.
         (C)   Require that necessary maintenance will be provided for the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity will not be diminished.
      (5)   Interpretation of flood boundaries.  Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions).  Where a map boundary and field
elevations disagree, the elevations delineated in the flood elevation profile
from the Flood Insurance Study shall prevail. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Section
1127.06.
      (6)   Alteration of community boundaries.  Upon occurrence, notify FEMA
in writing whenever the boundaries of the City have been modified by annexation
or the community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority
to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
In order that the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the
City's boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the
City's suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits
or the new area for which the City has assumed or relinquished floodplain
management regulatory authority.
 
1127.05  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (a)   General Standards.  The following standards apply in all areas of
special flood hazard including those where base flood elevation data have been
provided.  Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on
fill to at least one (1) foot  above the base flood level, the requirements for
Section
1127.05(a)(1) and (2) are satisfied.
      (1)   Anchoring. 
         (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
         (B)   All manufactured homes, not otherwise regulated under the Ohio
Revised Code pertaining to manufactured home parks, shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.  Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame
ties to ground anchors.
      (2)   Construction materials and methods.
         (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
         (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
         (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (3)   Utilities.  The following standards apply to all water supply,
sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the
Ohio Revised Code:
         (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
         (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
         (C)   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (4)   Subdivision proposals.
         (A)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
         (B)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
         (C)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
         (D)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall meet the specific standards of Section
1127.05(b)(6).
      (5)   Standards in areas of special flood hazard without base flood
elevation data.  In all areas of special flood hazard identified as Zone A on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map where base flood elevation data are not available
from any source, including Section
1127.04(d)(2), the following provisions apply:
         (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
(including manufactured homes), commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the
flood of record or at least two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade,
whichever is greater.
 
   (b)   Specific standards.  In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Section
1127.03(b), Section
1127.04(d)(2), or Section
1127.05(b)(6), the following additional provisions are required:
      (1)   Residential construction.
         (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least
one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
         (B)   In AO zones new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number on the City's or the County's Flood
Insurance Rate Map, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified, and
adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction.
         (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
            (i)   be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of  at
least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; 
            (ii)   have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
            (iii)   be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the standards of this subsection. 
Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section
1127.04(a)(3).
         (B)   In AO zones new construction and substantial improvements shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number on the City's or the
County's Flood Insurance Rate Map (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified); or be floodproofed to that level consistent with the floodproofing
standards of Section
1127.05(b)(2)(A), and adequate drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      (3)   Accessory structures.
         (A)   A relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals for accessory structures (e.g., sheds,
detached garages) containing no more than 576 square feet and a value of no
more than $ 10,000 dollars.  Such structures must meet the encroachment
provisions of Section
1127.05(c) and the following additional standards:
            (i)   they shall not be used for human habitation;
            (ii)    they shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
            (iii)   they shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
            (iv)   they shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
            (v)   service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the base flood
elevation; and,
            (vi)   they shall meet the opening requirements of Section
1127.05(b)(5).
      (4)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.  The following
standards shall apply to all new and substantially improved manufactured homes
not subject to the manufactured home park requirements of Section 3733.01, Ohio
Revised Code.
         (A)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section
1127.05(a)(1)(B).
         (B)   Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation.
         These standards shall also apply to all recreational vehicles that are
either (i) located on sites for 180 days or more, or (ii) are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
      (5)   Enclosures below the lowest floor.  The following standards apply
to all new and substantially improved residential and nonresidential non-
basement structures which are elevated to at least one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must:
         (A)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or,
         (B)   Must meet or exceed the following criteria:
            (i)   a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
            (ii)   the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices  provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (6)   Subdivisions and large developments.  In all areas of special flood
hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance
with Section
1127.03(b) or Section
1127.04(d)(2), the following standards apply to all subdivision proposals,
including manufactured home subdivisions, and other proposed developments
containing at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less):
         (A)   The applicant shall provide base flood elevation data performed
in accordance with standard engineering practices;
         (B)   If Section
1127.05(b)(6)(A) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of Section
1127.05(a) and Section
1127.05(b).
 
   (c)   Floodways.
      (1)   Areas within floodways.  The Flood Insurance Study referenced in
Section
1127.03(b) identifies a segment within areas of special flood hazard known as a
floodway.  Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of flood
information as specified in Section
1127.04(d)(2).  The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and cause erosion. 
The following provisions apply within all delineated floodway areas:
         (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices
demonstrates that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
         (B)   If Section
1127.05(c)(1)(A) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of Section
1127.05(b).
         (C)   Any encroachment within the floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations can only be granted upon the prior approval
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  Such requests must be submitted by
the Community Development Director or his designee to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and must meet the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      (2)   Areas without floodways.  In all areas of special flood hazard
where the Flood Insurance Study provides base flood elevation data as set forth
in Section
1127.03(b), but no floodways have been designated, the following provisions
apply:
         (A)   New construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall only be permitted if it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 1 (one) foot at any point.
         (B)   If Section
1127.05(c)(2)(A) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of Section
1127.05.
 
1127.06  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the City of
Springfield shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Director of Community Development or his designee in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals or
any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Clark County Court of Common
Pleas, as provided in Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
         (A)   the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (B)   the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (C)   the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (D)   the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (E)   the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (F)   the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (G)   the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (H)   the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (I)   the safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (J)   the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
         (K)   the costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of Section
1127.06(a)(4) and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   The Community Development Director or his designee shall maintain
the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
 
   (b)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances may only be issued where due to physical characteristics
of the property compliance with the requirements of this chapter creates an
exceptional hardship.  Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the
requirements of this chapter do not constitute an exceptional hardship.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum  necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items Section
1127.06(a)(4)(i-xi) have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases
beyond one half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (6)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (A)   a showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (B)   a determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (C)   a determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in this chapter,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section
1127.06(a)(4), or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
         (D)   a determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1128
OHP Historic Preservation Overlay District
 
1128.01   Purpose.
1128.02   Map designations.
 
1128.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to identify on the Zoning Map those areas
designated as Historic Districts pursuant to Chapter
1321.
 
1128.02  MAP DESIGNATION.
   All Historic Districts established pursuant to Chapter
1321 shall be portrayed on the Zoning Map as an OHP Historic Preservation
Overlay District, overlaid on the underlying zoning, in order to alert
interested parties.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1129
OPD-H Planned Development Housing Overlay District
 
1129.01   Purpose.
1129.02   Intent.
1129.03   Applicability.
1129.04   General Requirements.
1129.05   Requirements for areas less than two acres.
1129.06   Preliminary OPD-H plan.
1129.07   Preliminary OPD-H plan approval.
1129.08   Report of City Planning Board.
1129.09   Changes in an approved preliminary OPD-H plan.
1129.10   Final OPD-H plan.
1129.11   Final OPD-H plan of portion.
1129.12   Final plan approval.
1129.13   Changes in an approved final OPD-H plan.
1129.14   Building permits.
 
1129.01  PURPOSE.
   The OPD-H Planned Development Housing Overlay District is established to
permit flexibility in the use and design of structures and land in situations
where conventional development may be inappropriate and where modifications of
requirements of the underlying zone will not be contrary to the intent and
purpose of the Zoning Code, inconsistent with the Land Use Plan, nor harmful to
the neighborhood.
 
1129.02  INTENT.
   The intent of the OPD-H district regulations is to:
   (a)     Provide flexibility in architectural design, placement and
clustering of buildings, use of open space, provision of traffic circulation
facilities and parking, and related site and design considerations;
   (b)     Encourage the preservation and best use of existing landscape
features through development sensitive to the natural features of the
surrounding area;
   (c)     Promote efficient land use with smaller networks of utilities and
streets;
   (d)     Encourage and preserve opportunities for energy efficient
development;
   (e)     Promote an attractive and safe living environment that is compatible
with surrounding residential developments; and
   (f)     Provide an alternate method for redeveloping older residential areas
and to encourage infill development.
 
1129.03  APPLICABILITY.
   Housing in planned developments shall be permitted in R districts as
follows:
   (a)   For development of land of two (2) acres or more.
   (b)   For development of land less than two (2) acre where such development
is more appropriate and more efficient than conventional development because of
environmentally sensitive areas, existing natural features or scenic assets,
the amount of land available for infill development, or because of the age of
existing development in the vicinity.  (See Section
1129.05 for standards relating to developments of less than two (2) acres).
 
1129.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All planned developments shall meet the following criteria:
   (a)   Land uses.  Any residential use and combinations of land uses are
permitted. Combinations of land uses may include single- family, multi-family,
group care facilities and commercial uses.  However, commercial uses shall not
be permitted in planned developments on land less than two (2) acres in area. 
Golf courses are allowable commercial uses on residentially zoned property as
part of an OPD-H.
      (Ord. 02-414.  Passed 10-29-02.)
   (b)   Variations.  Variations in the requirements of the underlying district
may be permitted. However, setbacks required by the Ohio Basic Building Code,
legislated by the State of Ohio, or the Ohio Residential Code For One-, Two-,
and Three-Family Dwellings, as specified in Chapter
1303 of Part 13 Building Code of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio,
whichever is applicable, shall be provided.
   (c)   Dwelling unit density.  The dwelling unit density, based upon the land
area minus public and/or private street right-of-way area, if any, may be
computed on the basis of that permitted for the least restrictive use allowed
in the underlying district.
   (d)   Streets.  Planned developments shall make provision for the extension
of streets, if any.
   (e)   Storm water management.  The planned development shall comply with the
requirements for storm water management, including the provision of detention
or retention basins. The developer shall submit a legally binding instrument
setting forth the procedures to be followed in maintaining the areas and the
means for financing maintenance costs. Generally, such costs shall be shared by
all owners of property located within the planned development, with unpaid
costs becoming a lien against individual properties.
   (f)    Open space.  Except in a conventional subdivision, planned
developments shall be provided with open space for recreational purposes and to
enhance the general character of the area.  In the event the open space land is
to be retained under private ownership, the developer shall submit a legally
binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed in maintaining
the areas and the means for financing maintenance costs as with storm water
detention or retention basins in Subsection (e) above.
   (g)   Dedication of land for public use.  All proposed dedications of land
for public use, including those to be dedicated for recreational use, shall be
approved in writing by appropriate departments of the City before the approval
of the plan by the City Commission.  All land dedications for public use shall
conform to the requirements of city ordinances.
   (h)   Ownership.  At the time of approval of a preliminary OPD-H plan, the
developer must submit evidence of ownership of the property to be developed or
show evidence of a legally binding executed option agreement for purchasing all
the property.
   (i)   Schedule of completion.  A developer or sponsor of a planned
development shall submit a signed statement generally describing the proposed
development and setting forth an intended time schedule for the completion of
various phases.
   (j)   Other requirements.  Other conditions may be imposed as deemed
necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter.  Such conditions
may include but are not limited to planting screens, fencing, construction
commencement and completion dates, lighting, operational controls, improved
traffic circulation, highway access restrictions, yards, and parking
requirements.
 
1129.05  REQUIREMENTS FOR AREAS LESS THAN TWO (2) ACRES.
   An OPD-H plan for an area containing less than two (2) acres shall in
addition to or in lieu of the requirements of Section
1129.04 above, meet the following requirements:
   (a)   The density and design of the OPD-H shall be compatible in use, size
and type of structure, relative amount of open space, traffic circulation and
general layout with adjoining land uses, and shall be integrated into the
neighborhood.
   (b)   Multi-family structures located adjacent to existing single-family
dwellings shall be sited, landscaped and screened by natural features and plant
materials to harmoniously integrate the planned development with the
surrounding neighborhood.
   (c)   The development shall not overburden existing streets and utilities.
   (d)   The development shall not adversely affect views, light and air,
property values and privacy of neighboring properties any more than would a
conventional development.
   (e)   Commercial uses shall be prohibited.
 
1129.06  PRELIMINARY OPD-H PLAN.
   The owner of land who wishes to develop his property according to the
provisions of this chapter, shall submit to the City Clerk six (6) copies of a
preliminary OPD-H plan and application for preliminary approval.  The
preliminary OPD-H plan for the use and development of the area of land shall
list all requested variations from requirements of the underlying district in
which the tract of land is located.  The preliminary OPD-H plan may show a
range of dimensions and need not have the specificity of the final plan.  The
application shall be accompanied by the following:
   (a)   A location map affixed to the plan.
   (b)   A preliminary OPD-H plan of the proposed development drawn to an
appropriate scale, showing:
      (1)   Existing and proposed topographic contours at two (2) foot
intervals or less.
      (2)   Location of the uses and topography at two (2) foot contours within
100 feet of the proposed development.
      (3)   Location of existing and proposed streets, including points of
connection.
      (4)   Location of existing and proposed utilities, including points of
connection.
      (5)   Location of storm water management facilities.
      (6)   Proposed uses of the land.
      (7)   Number of dwelling units proposed for the planned development.
      (8)   Proposed general arrangement of the buildings.
      (9)   Location and area of proposed open spaces either to be held in
common or publicly, and whether to be used for active recreational purposes or
only as an environmental amenity.
      (10)   Sketches to show the general design of building, types and the
character of the development.
      (11)   Legal description of the tract of land for the planned
development.
      (12)   Parking provisions.
      (13)   Loading facilities, if any.
      (14)   Proposed landscaping.
      (15)   Storm drainage.
      16)   Such other information as is necessary to ascertain compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
 
1129.07  PRELIMINARY OPD-H PLAN APPROVAL.
   Approval of a preliminary OPD-H plan shall be by ordinance according to the
procedures set forth in Chapter
1174, Amendments.  Approval of the zoning of the land to an OPD-H district
shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan.  A preliminary OPD-H plan
shall be valid for no more than 24 months, unless specifically provided
otherwise in the OPD-H ordinance.  If no building permit has been issued for
the development within the 24 month period, the area of land to which the OPD-
H ordinance applies shall be considered for possible rezoning by the City to
remove the OPD-H designation.
 
1129.08  REPORT OF CITY PLANNING BOARD.
   Upon completion of review of the preliminary OPD-H plan of the planned
development, the Planning Board shall recommend either approval or denial of
the plan and shall make a written report of its findings to the City Commission
to substantiate its recommendation.  The findings shall address the following:
that the variations in setbacks, lot area requirements, building heights,
building types, sizes of buildings, the combination of land uses, and traffic
flow  will be in the public interest, in harmony with the purposes of this code
and other building regulations of the City and will not adversely affect nearby
properties.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
1129.09  CHANGES IN AN APPROVED PRELIMINARY OPD-H PLAN.
   Material changes in an approved preliminary OPD-H plan shall be subject to
the same procedures for approval as for the original approved plan.  A material
change is any change in the principal use or character of the development from
the use or uses shown on the preliminary OPD-H plan and any dimensional change
beyond the ranges specified on the preliminary plan.  Any other changes are
considered minor changes and may be approved by the Planning and Development
Director.
 
1129.10  FINAL OPD-H PLAN.
   All R-4 and OPD-H plans currently in force at the time this ordinance is
adopted shall be considered final OPD-H plans, and continue in full force and
effect.  Applications for approval of new final OPD-H plan shall meet all the
requirements of the preliminary OPD-H plan and include the following:
   (a)   Detailed plans and specifications of the planned development.
   (b)   Building elevations and floor plans for all structures.
   (c)   Details of materials to be used for exterior construction.
   (d)   A landscape plan including screening and buffering, if necessary,
between the proposed and existing development.
 
1129.11  FINAL OPD-H PLAN OF PORTION.
   After preliminary approval of the entire planned development is given, a
final plan of a portion within the planned development may be approved if:
   (a)   The portion is more than two (2) acres in size.
   (b)   The plan of the portion meets all requirements of a final plan.
   (c)   The dwelling unit density within the portion does not exceed the
dwelling unit density allowable for the least restrictive use for that area
under existing zoning.
   (d)   The portion can function as an independent development unit with
adequate access, services, utilities, open space, etc.
   (e)   The developer subdivides and improves all public rights-of-way
necessary to support the portion.
   (f)   The remaining portion is not left as an undevelopable remnant.
 
1129.12  FINAL PLAN APPROVAL.
   Final approval of any OPD-H plan shall be by administrative review. 
Approval shall be based on compliance with an approved preliminary OPD-H plan
and any modifications required by the Planning Board having jurisdiction and
City Commission at the time the land was zoned to OPD-H.  After approval of the
final plan, permits may be issued to carry out the approved plan.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
1129.13  CHANGES IN AN APPROVED FINAL OPD-H PLAN.
   Material changes in an approved final OPD-H plan shall be subject to the
same procedures for approval as for the original approved plan.  A material
change is any change in the principal use or character of the development from
the principal use or uses shown on the final OPD-H plan and any dimensional
change specified on the final plan.  Any other changes are considered minor
changes and may be approved by the Planning and Development Director.
 
1129.14  BUILDING PERMITS.
   The final plan, or parts of the final plan as finally approved, shall be
filed in the Building Official's office and building permits may be issued only
for structures conforming to the OPD-H plan.  In the event commercial uses are
approved as a part of a planned development, no building permit for a
commercial use shall be issued until Certificates of Occupancy for a minimum of
25 percent of the housing units planned for the area (or approved portion) have
been issued or unless 25 percent of the housing units planned for the area (or
approved portion) will be constructed simultaneously.  (Separate building
permits shall be obtained by the developer for the construction of  housing and
commercial uses where separate buildings are to be used.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1130
CC-2A Shopping Center District
 
1130.01   Purpose.
1130.02   Principal uses permitted.
1130.03   Provisional uses permitted.
1130.04   Conditional uses permitted.
1130.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1130.06   General provisions.
1130.07   Special provisions.
1130.08   Signs and outdoor advertising.
1130.09   Prohibited uses.
 
1130.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide locations for planned shopping
centers.  Access should have the same conditions as the CC-2 District.
 
1130.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   Same as in CC-2 District, except as hereinafter modified.
 
1130.03  PROVISIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   None.
 
1130.04  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   Same as in CC-2 District, except as hereinafter modified.
 
1130.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   Same as in CC-2 District, except as hereinafter modified.
 
1130.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to the requirements of
Title Four and
Title Five and to the supplemental requirements of
Title Six, where applicable.
 
1130.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Development of a lot or separate tract larger than two (2) acres shall
be subject to the special provisions of Subsection
1108.07(b).  All CC-2A tracts shall consist of not less than two (2) acres, or
else be continuous to a tract presently zoned CC-2A.
 
   (b)   The owner shall submit to the Planning Board having jurisdiction for
its review a preliminary plan for the use and development of such tract of
land.  The Planning Board shall investigate and ascertain whether the location,
size, access, and other general characteristics of the proposed plan comply
with the following conditions:
      (1)   The plan shall provide for the development of an integrated
shopping area with adequate and properly arranged vehicular access points and
parking facilities which will be safe to use and will have no adverse effects
upon the adjoining or surrounding development.
      (2)   When the development plan is found to comply with the requirements
set forth in this section and other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code,
the Planning Board shall submit such plan with its report and recommendation
together with the required application by the proponents for the necessary
change in the zoning classification of the site of the proposed shopping area
to the City Commission which shall hold a public hearing on both the
development plan and application for a change in zoning.
      (3)   The City Commission shall take into consideration the
recommendation from the Planning Board on both the rezoning and the development
plan in making its decision in establishing the CC-2A zone.  If such rezoning
is approved, the ordinance shall include the development plan and any
amendments thereto.
      (4)   After the development plan has been approved by the City Commission
and in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or re-arrangements of
vehicular access buildings and building additions may be requested by the
proponents, such adjustments or re-arrangements shall be authorized by motion
of the City Commission after being recommended by the City Planning Board.
 
   (c)   No building or structure shall be located less than fifty (50) feet
from any lot in any R District, nor less than ten (10) feet from any district
other than a CC-2A District.  Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code,
no building or structure shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from any
street right-of-way.  The shopping area shall be permanently screened, except
for necessary sight clearances at entrances and exits, from all adjoining
properties located in any R District by a solid wall or compact evergreen hedge
not less than four (4) feet or over seven (7) feet in height.  The shopping
area shall also be permanently screened from all properties in any R District
located across the street and within ninety (90) feet from any such shopping
area by a solid wall or compact evergreen hedge not less than three (3) feet in
height.  The walls or hedges shall be properly and permanently landscaped and
maintained.  Additional requirements may be imposed to reduce or eliminate the
effect that the shopping area may have on adjoining properties.
 
   (d)   All ground area occupied by all the buildings shall not exceed twenty-
five percent (25%) of the total area of the lot or tract.
 
   (e)   For a building or a group of buildings constituting a shopping center,
one parking space shall be provided for each 222.2 square feet of gross floor
area.  For a business located in a separate building from the shopping center
and on a tract of land under two (2) acres in area and under separate
ownership, the number of parking spaces required for the business shall be in
accordance with the parking requirements of Section
1153.02.
 
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Zoning Code, for a
building or a group of buildings constituting a shopping center of at least
10,000 square feet, there shall be provided one (1) off-street loading or
unloading space for each 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of aggregate
floor space.  At least one-third (1/3) of the space required shall be
sufficient in area and vertical clearance to accommodate trucks of the tractor-
trailer type.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
1130.08  SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
   The sign provisions of Section
1155.05 (g) shall apply.
 
1130.09  PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses shall be not be permitted in a CC-2A District:
   (a)   Billboards.
      (Ord. 11-242. Passed 9-13-11.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1131
UCOD Urban Commercial Overlay District
 
1131.01   Purpose.
1131.02   Intent.
1131.03   General requirements.
 
1131.01  PURPOSE.
   The UCOD Urban Commercial Overlay District is established to protect, re-
establish, and retain the unique aesthetic and architectural character,
including retail display windows, side and rear parking, minimal setbacks, and
pedestrian-oriented site design, prevalent in central city commercial areas.
 
1131.02  INTENT.
   The intent of the UCOD Urban Commercial Overlay District is to:
   (a)     Promote an attractive and safe commercial and living environment
that is compatible with existing historic structures;
   (b)     Encourage pedestrian-oriented site design;
   (c)     Encourage investment in compatible designed development, including
retail display windows, side and rear parking, minimal setbacks, and other
features of traditional urban design.
 
1131.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All UCOD Urban Commercial Overly District new construction shall meet the
following criteria:
   (a)   Maximum Setback.  The distance between the principal building or
structure and the public street right-of-way line shall not exceed ten (10)
feet.  Buildings on street corners shall comply with this maximum setback for
both frontages.
   (b)   Building Standards.
      (1)   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a main
entrance door on the primary street.
      (2)   For commercially-used property, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets, between the height of two (2) feet and
nine (9) feet above the sidewalk grade, shall be window glass.
      (3)   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories [twenty (20)
feet] in height.  If the building does not actually have at least two (2)
stories, then it shall have appropriate architectural detail to appear to have
a second story.
      (4)   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements into their façade design.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1132
UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District
 
1132.01   Purpose.
1132.02   Intent.
1132.03   All UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District.
 
1132.01  PURPOSE.
   The UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District is established to unify
the appearance of new commercial signs and structures in entryways along
designated state routes, recalling through materials the historic context of
the city.
(Ord. 04-131.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
1132.02  INTENT.
   The intent of the UCED Urban Commercial Entryway Overlay District is to:
   (a)   Promote an attractive commercial environment that is compatible with
existing historic structures.
   (b)   Make signage more uniform in size and type throughout the entryway
corridor.
      (Ord. 04-131.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
1132.03  ALL UCED URBAN COMMERCIAL ENTRYWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   New commercial construction shall meet the following criteria:
   (a)   Signage.  Regardless of the sign size provisions applying in the
underlying zone, a free-standing sign shall be permitted with the following
allowance:
      Maximum area:  99 square feet per sign face (may be double-faced).
      Maximum Height:  26 feet above the height of the nearest street grade.
   (b)   Building Standards.
      (1)   Commercial building facades facing public streets shall be
constructed of brick.
      (2)   No loading docks or trash storage bins shall be visible from the
entryway state route.
      (Ord. 04-131.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1133
DMC Downtown Medical Campus District
 
1133.01   Purpose.
1133.02   Intent.
1133.03   Applicability.
1133.04   Principal uses permitted.
1133.05   Accessory uses permitted.
1133.06   General provisions.
1133.07   Special provisions.
 
1133.01  PURPOSE.
   The DMC Downtown Medical Campus District is intended to provide for the
development of hospital and specialized medical services in a central location
for residents of the City and surrounding communities. Hospitals, health care,
medical offices, and related uses for convenience to hospital activities are
appropriate in the DMC Zone.
(Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.02  INTENT. 
   The intent of the DMC District is to encourage and foster the planning,
design and construction of a well-functioning, attractive medical campus
environment that:  (a) provides an appropriate setting for both initial and
long term capacity for delivering high quality healthcare services to the City,
community and the region; (b)  provides flexibility in architectural design,
placement and clustering of buildings, use of open space, provision for traffic
circulation facilities and parking, and related site and design considerations;
(c) enhances the downtown area and is an anchor for continued investment in
redevelopment and renewal of the downtown area and its adjacent neighborhoods;
and (d) ensures sufficient flexibility and future capacity in the design and
placement of campus facilities to best meet the future evolution of healthcare
and ancillary services to the City, community and the region.
(Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.03  APPLICABILITY. 
   The DMC District shall have a minimum size of 40 acres except in those
situations where the City Planning Board determines that a lesser minimum size
is appropriate taking into consideration the purpose and intent as described in
Sections
1133.01 and
1133.02.
(Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.04  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   The following principal uses are permitted in a DMC District: 
   (a)    Assisted Living Facility.
   (b)    Daycare Facility (Child and Adult).
   (c)     Educational Facility, including, but not necessarily limited to: 
      (1)   Classrooms;
      (2)   Dormitories;
      (3)   Laboratories;
      (4)   Medical library;
   d)     Financial institution or branch banking facility internal to main
building. Indoor or stand-alone outdoor ATM or similar automated banking
facility;
   (e)     Helipad or helistop in conjunction with hospital;
   (f)     Hospital;
   (g)    Ambulatory Surgery Center;
   (h)    Mental Health Facility;
   (i)     Skilled Nursing Facility;
   (j)     Outpatient Services;
   (k)   Imaging Center;
   (l)     Long Term Care Facility;
   (m)     Medical Office Building;
   (n)     Clinic;
   (o)     Dialysis Center;
   (p)     Dental Facility;
   (q)     Urgent Care Facility;
   (r)     Hospice;
   (s)     Hyperbaric Tre Center;
   (t)     Laboratories;
   (u)     Home Care Office Space;
   (v)     Pharmacy;
   (w)     Health Center;
   (x)     Reproductive Health Services Center;
   (y)     Diagnostic Services;
   (z)     Alternative Medicine Center;
   (aa)   Medical, optical, dental and prosthetic supply store;
   (bb)   Medical or Administrative Office and/or Building;
   (cc)   Religious institution;
   (dd)   Medical Research Facility including, but not necessarily limited to,
animal research to support Hospital services;
   (ee)   Wellness/Rehabilitation Centers;
   (ff)     Parking Facility or Public Transportation Facility;
   (gg)   Bookstore having its public access to the main entrance or to a
central corridor of the hospital or other principal use facility;
   (hh)   Flower shop having its public access to the main entrance or to a
central corridor of the hospital or other principal use facility;
   (ii)    Food service having its public access to the main entrance or to a
central corridor of the hospital or other principal use facility;
   (jj)     Gift shop having its public access to the main entrance or to a
central corridor of the hospital  or other principal use facility;
   (kk)   Laundry and Dry Cleaning having its public access to the main
entrance or to a central corridor of the hospital or other principal use
facility;
   (ll)     Conference Center for hospital related/education purposes; 
   (mm)   Patient and patient family overnight accommodations;
   (nn)   The foregoing list of permitted uses is not intended to be exhaustive
of all uses permitted within the DMC Downtown Medical Campus District and any
other use supportive, complimentary or compatible with a medical campus area is
permitted.
      (Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.05  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   (a)     Central Utility Plant;
   (b)     Emergency and patient drop-off areas;
   (c)     Garage for:
      (1)    Ambulances;
      (2)    Grounds equipment;
      (3)    Maintenance of principal and/or accessory use;
   (d)     Medical Support Materials Warehouse;
   (e)     Public Transportation Area;
   (f)     Receiving Docks;
   (g)     Skywalks over private property;
   (h)     Skywalks over public streets when approved by the Department of
Community Development;
   (i)     Storage facilities (records, films, linens, equipment, supplies).
   (j)     Information technology and communications systems.
      (Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Section
1133.07, all principal and accessory uses and structures permitted within this
district shall be subject to
Title IV and
Title V and to the supplemental requirements of
Title VI, where applicable.
(Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1133.07  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   None.
(Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1135
Requirements for Specific Uses
 
1135.01   Uses and requirements.
1135.02   Accessory apartment.
1135.03   Cemetery and mausoleum.
1135.04   Clubs.
1135.05   Repealed by Ord. 06-425, passed 12-5-06.
1135.06   Repealed by Ord. 06-425.
1135.07   Repealed by Ord. 06-425.
1135.08   Repealed by Ord. 06-425, passed 12-5-06.
1135.09   Repealed by Ord. 06-425, passed 12-5-06.
1135.10   Repealed by Ord. 06-425, passed 12-5-06.
1135.11   Repealed by Ord. 06-425.
1135.12   Repealed by Ord. 06-425.
1135.13   Repealed by Ord. 06-425.
1135.14   Repealed by Ord. 06-425, passed 12-5-06.
1135.15   Separability.
1135.16   Dwellings, zero lot line or attached.
1135.17   Extraction.
1135.18   Funeral homes.
1135.19   Home occupation.
1135.20   Kennel, veterinarian clinic, and animal hospital.
1135.21   Nursing home.
1135.22   Public utility or public use.
1135.23   Religious institution.
1135.24   Salvage yard.
1135.25   Satellite receiving device.
1135.26   Animals.
1135.27   Cargo containers.
 
1135.01  USES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The following uses are listed as provisional uses, accessory uses or special
exceptions in various districts in this code.  These uses are required to meet
the requirements of this chapter in addition to the requirements of the
districts in which the uses are allowed.  If there is a conflict between the
requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the districts in which the
uses are allowed, the most restrictive requirements shall govern.
 
1135.02  ACCESSORY APARTMENT.
   An accessory apartment within an owner-occupied, single family dwelling
shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   The accessory apartment shall consist of a separate dwelling unit from
the single-family dwelling.
   (b)   Not more than one accessory apartment may be established within a
single-family dwelling.
   (c)   The owner of the dwelling within which an accessory apartment is
located must occupy at least one of the dwelling units as the owner's permanent
residence.
   (d)   The accessory apartment and the principal dwelling shall be under the
same ownership.
   (e)   The dwelling within which the accessory apartment is contained shall
have the appearance of a single-family dwelling.  An entrance for the accessory
apartment shall not face a street, unless the entrance existed as a utility
entrance to the original dwelling prior to the establishment of the accessory
apartment.
   (f)   No addition to the single-family dwelling for an accessory apartment
shall increase the original floor area of the dwelling by more than 10 percent.
   (g)   One off-street parking space shall be provided for the accessory
apartment.  This space shall be in addition to the existing required off-street
parking spaces for the single-family dwelling.
   (h)   The accessory apartment shall not contain more than 30 percent of the
dwelling's total floor area, be larger than 800 square feet, nor have more than
two (2) bedrooms.  However, the minimum floor area shall conform to the
requirements of the OBOA One, Two & Three Family Dwelling Code, as specified in
Chapter
1303 of Part 13--Building Code of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield.
   (i)   The right to have an accessory apartment shall cease upon transfer of
title to the property, and the right to maintain an accessory apartment in no
way authorizes establishment of the dwelling as a duplex.
   (j)   A notarized affidavit from the owner verifying that he is the legal
resident of one of the dwelling units on the premises and that one of the
occupants in the other dwelling unit is elderly or handicapped shall be
submitted to the City prior to issuance of an accessory apartment zoning
certificate.  Furthermore, the owner shall, as a requirement of continuance of
the accessory apartment, submit a notarized affidavit by January 31 each year,
certifying compliance with this requirement.
   (k)   The effective period of the permit shall be for three (3) years.  At
the end of every three (3) year period, renewal of the accessory apartment
zoning certificate shall be granted only after completion of a routine housing
inspection verifying that the property remains the principal residence of the
owner and that all of the conditions of this code have been met.
 
1135.03  CEMETERY AND MAUSOLEUM. 
   A cemetery and mausoleum shall be subject to the following specific
requirements:
   (a)   Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than
20 acres or five (5) acres for a pet cemetery.
   (b)   All interments and structures including but not limited to a
mausoleum, permanent monuments or maintenance buildings shall be set back not
less than 35 feet from all property lines.
   (c)   All access shall be provided from a primary or secondary arterial
street identified on the Land Use Plan.
   (d)   The cemetery shall be screened from view of any abutting residential
district by meeting the requirements of Subsection
1161.02(h).
   (e)   Approval shall be contingent upon a satisfactory drainage plan
approved by the City Engineer.
   (f)   Cemeteries and mausoleums allowed only as a conditional use shall have
adequate off-street stacking spaces provided for funeral processions.
   (g)   No burial plots shall be permitted in a flood plain.
 
1135.04  CLUBS.
   A club shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   Information that specifies whether it is nonprofit or for profit, its
purpose and activities, number of members, and its officers shall be submitted
and included with the zoning certificate for the club.
   (b)   Use of the facilities shall be limited to the members and their
guests.
   (d)   A listing of anticipated peak times and activities and anticipated
expansion of the facilities shall be submitted.
   (e)   All structures and facilities shall comply with the following
dimensional requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot area:  30,000 square feet
      (2)   Minimum yards:
         A.   Front yard--100 feet
         B.   Side yard--30 feet
         C.   Rear yard--50 feet
   (f)   Clubs requiring more than 20 parking spaces shall be located on and
have its only access to a street with a minimum pavement width of 40 feet.
   (g)   Parking facilities shall not be located closer than 20 feet from a
side or rear lot line where abutting an R district and shall be screened from
view of the abutting R district by meeting the requirements of Subsection
1161.02(h).
   (h)   The following requirements shall be applicable to specific uses in
association with a club.
      (1)   Driving range.  In R districts, outdoor lighting shall not be
installed for its use during nighttime hours.
      (2)   Swimming pools.
         A.   An outdoor pool shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence or
wall to prevent uncontrolled access.
         B.   A pool shall be subject to the yard requirements of this section.
         C.   A pool located within an R district or within 100 feet of a lot
in an R district shall be screened from view according to the requirements of
Subsection
1161.02(h).
 
1135.05  THROUGH 1135.14 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 06-425, PASSED 12-5-06.
 
1135.15  SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section, clause, paragraph, sentence, item, phrase, or provision
of this Ordinance be declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
 
1135.16  DWELLINGS, ZERO LOT LINE OR ATTACHED.
A zero lot line dwelling or townhouse shall be subject to the following
specific requirements:
   (a)   Where an abutting lot has been developed with a principal building
having a setback of more than zero (0) feet but less than 10 feet from the side
lot line in common, the zero lot line dwelling shall be located so there is a
minimum of 10 feet to the adjacent principal building.  An easement from the
abutting lot owner shall be secured prior to the issuance of a building permit
to ensure that a zero (0) or ten 10 foot separation is retained.
   (b)   No portion of a wall, roof, or appurtenance along the zero side yard
shall project over the lot line.  Openings in the wall shall be prohibited.
   (c)   Legal provision shall be made for permanent access for the maintenance
of the exterior portion of the proposed building wall located upon the lot line
and for other common elements such as driveways.  A permanent 10 foot
maintenance easement to provide such access shall be secured prior to issuance
of a building permit.
   (d)   Each end unit of a townhouse shall have one (1) side yard of a minimum
of ten 10 feet.
   (e)   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a separate building access
and with separate utility service from the street.
 
1135.17  EXTRACTION.
   Extraction shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   A license to operate shall be obtained from the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR).  Failure to maintain said license shall constitute
abandonment.
   (b)   An application for such operation shall set forth the following
information (compare to DNR requirements):
      (1)   Name of the owner or owners of land from which removal is to be
made.
      (2)   Name of the applicant making request for such a permit.
      (3)   Name of the person or corporation conducting the actual removal
operation.
      (4)   Location, description and size of the area from which the removal
is to be made.
      (5)   Type of resources or materials to be removed.
      (6)   Proposed method of removal and whether or not blasting or other use
of explosives will be required.
      (7)   Description of equipment to be used.
      (8)   Anticipated ending date for extraction and the method of
rehabilitation and reclamation of the area.
      (9)   The means that will be used to prevent the deposition of mud and
debris from trucks on public streets and highways.
      (10)   The means of controlling fugitive dust from the extraction.
      (11)   Certification that all state and federal regulations can and will
be met.
   (f)   Extraction shall not occur within 1,000 feet of an R District.
   (g)   Extraction shall not occur within 100 feet of abutting property or a
street.
   (h)   The applicant shall demonstrate that such operations will not be
detrimental to the vicinity or surrounding properties.
   (i)   The banks of an extraction site less than five (5) feet deep, shall be
sloped at a grade of not less than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot
vertical, and such banks shall be surfaced with at least six (6) inches of
suitable soil and seeded with a vegetative cover to prevent erosion.
   (j)   Whenever the floor of an extraction site is more than five (5) feet
below the grade of the site's perimeter or the site contains more than three
(3) feet of water, the site shall be completely enclosed by a barrier
consisting of a fence on not less than a six (6) foot high mound of earth
planted with suitable dense planting or other suitable material sufficient in
either case to prevent persons from entering the site.  Such mound shall be
located at least 25 feet from any street, road, highway or boundary of the
quarry property.
   (k)   All quarrying, blasting, drilling or mining shall be carried out in a
manner and on such scale as to minimize dust, noise and vibrations and to
prevent adversely affecting the surrounding properties.  A blasting permit
shall be obtained from the Springfield Fire Division for all blasting that is
done.
 
1135.18  FUNERAL HOMES.
   Funeral homes shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   Funeral homes shall be located with access to a secondary or primary
arterial street as identified on the Land Use Plan Map.
   (b)   Sufficient off-street automobile parking and assembly area shall be
provided for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession.  The assembly area
shall be provided in addition to the required off-street parking area.
   (c)   The site shall have a minimum frontage of 120 feet and a minimum lot
area of 40,000 square feet.
   (d)   Loading and unloading areas used by ambulances, hearses or other such
service vehicles and located within an R district or within 100 feet of a lot
in an R district shall be [obscured] screened from view according to the
requirements of Subsection
1161.02(h).
 
1135.19  HOME OCCUPATION.
   A home occupation shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   The home occupation shall be operated solely within the dwelling unit
or an accessory building to the dwelling unit.  One person not a resident of
the premises may be employed to assist in the home occupation.  However,
nothing in these provisions shall prevent persons who do not reside on the
premises from assisting in those aspects of a home occupation that are off-
premises.
   (b)   Those home occupations that occupy more than 10 percent of the floor
area of a dwelling unit shall be subject to the provisions of the Ohio Basic
Building Code.  Floor area shall be construed as that area of a dwelling unit
bounded by the exterior walls or fire walls of the dwelling unit (refer to the
Ohio Basic Building Code, as regulated in Chapter
1303 of Part 13--Building Code of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield).
   (c)   There shall be no external alteration of the residential appearance of
a dwelling.  However, an entrance which provides direct access to the home
occupation may be constructed in a wall of the dwelling that does not face a
street.
   (d)   There shall be no direct selling or leasing of stocks of merchandise,
supplies or products on premises.  A person may pick up an order made by prior
arrangements.
   (e)   There shall be no disturbance such as noise, vibration, electrical
interference, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare beyond the lot lines or beyond
the confines of the dwelling unit if the unit is part of a two-family or multi-
family dwelling.
   (f)   There shall be no exterior display; exterior storage of merchandise,
inventory, equipment, or materials; window display, including a sign visible
from outside the dwelling; sign (except as otherwise provided in Subsection
1155.06(b)(2)(A); house calls after 10:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m.; nor other
indication from the exterior that a dwelling or accessory building is being
used in part for any use other than that of a dwelling or accessory building
for purely residential purposes.
   (g)   There shall be no toxic; explosive; flammable; combustible; corrosive;
etiologic; or radioactive materials, used or stored on the premises, except
that which is generally used for domestic purposes.
   (h)   At the dwelling of the home occupation, the use; parking or storage of
such equipment and vehicles as tractors; semi-truck tractors or trailers; heavy
equipment such as construction equipment; and commercially licensed  vehicles
with six (6) wheels or more shall be prohibited.  Commercially licensed
vehicles with fewer than six (6) wheels shall be parked in adequate sized off-
street parking spaces which meet the requirements of this code.  However, not
more than one-third (1/3) of the (required) front yard shall be used for
parking or be surfaced with impervious material.
   (i)   The required number of off-street parking spaces for the dwelling unit
to which the home occupation is accessory, shall be provided.  The home
occupation shall not reduce nor render unusable, areas provided for required
off-street parking.
   (j)   No more than two (2) persons may avail themselves of the services
provided by a home occupation at any one time.  However, classes for
generalized or specialized private instruction for more than two (2) but not
more than 10 individuals may be permitted if authorized as a conditional use by
the Board of zoning appeals in accordance with the procedures of section
1172.05.
   (k)   The following uses and activities shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Ambulance service.
      (2)   Animal service, including a veterinarian establishment; animal
grooming business; kennel; or establishment for the boarding of animals.
      (3)   Appliance repair shop for large appliances such as but not limited
to clothes washers and dryers; cooking ranges; refrigerators and freezers; and
dishwashers.
      (4)   Barber shop.
      (5)   Beauty parlor, including a manicurist and cosmetologist.
      (6)   Limousine service involving more than two (2) limousines.
      (7)   Machine shop.
      (8)   Office of a person in a healing profession
      (9)   Painting of vehicles, trailers, or boats.
      (10)   Tattoo parlor.
      (11)   Vehicle and motorized equipment repair, including parts sales or
detailing; vehicle washing; and large and small engine repair.
      (12)   Welding shop.
   (l)   A Certificate of Zoning Approval shall be obtained from the Director
of Community Development or his authorized representative prior to establishing
a home occupation.  Home occupations shall, on occasion, be subject to
inspection to determine compliance with these provisions.
 
1135.20  KENNEL, VETERINARIAN CLINIC, AND ANIMAL HOSPITAL.
A kennel, veterinarian clinic, or animal hospital shall be subject to the
following specific requirements:
   (a)   Dimensional requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot area:  20,000 square foot
      (2)     Minimum yards:
         Front--50 feet
         Side--40 feet
         Rear--50 feet
   (b)   All structures shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from an R
district.
   (c)   Except in an AG district, there shall be no outdoor animal pen or dog
run.
   (d)   Services shall be administered within a fully enclosed building.
 
1135.21  NURSING HOME.
   A nursing home shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)   A nursing home shall access an arterial street as identified on the
Land Use Plan Map or on a street pavement wider than 30 feet.
   (b)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area:  600 square feet of lot area per each bed.
      (2)   Minimum yards:
         Front yard--40 feet
         Side yard--30 feet
         Rear yard--25 feet
      (3)   The maximum permitted building coverage shall be 40 percent.
 
1135.22  PUBLIC UTILITY OR PUBLIC USE.
   Public utilities shall be subject to the following conditions and standards:
   (a)   Site standards for essential services and utility uses:
      (1)   Utility substations shall be located at least 100 feet from an R
district boundary.
      (2)   The site shall access an arterial street as identified on the Land
Use Plan Map or on a street pavement wider that 30 feet.
      (3)   All proposed uses and facilities located within 100 feet of an R
district boundary shall be contained within buildings or structures.
      (4)   A landscaped berm at least five (5) feet in height shall be
required in all yards abutting an R district or street.
   (b)   Location of utility lines:
      (1)   Such use shall not affect the general plan.
      (2)   Such use shall not endanger the health and safety of residents or
workers in the area.
      (3)   The location of the use shall provide for minimal visual impact and
shall not impair the use of surrounding properties.
      (4)   The use of utility corridors shall be encouraged, using existing
utility line or transportation right-of-way for various transmission uses.
      (5)   The alignment shall follow the topography to minimize any effects
to the terrain.
      (6)   There shall be minimal vegetative clearance for soil erosion
control.
   (c)   Installation of underground utilities:
      (1)    All new extensions of electrical and communications distribution
and service facilities, equipment and lines carrying less than 34,500 volts,
hereafter constructed or installed shall be placed underground, unless special
permission to construct said facilities above ground is granted, as hereinafter
provided.
      (2)   All relocations of existing overhead electrical and communications
distribution and service poles supporting lines carrying less than 34,500
volts, required to be relocated by reason of change of grade or alignment, or
the widening of the street within which such overhead facilities exist, shall,
upon relocation, be placed underground, unless special permission to
reconstruct said facilities above ground is granted, as hereinafter provided. 
This provision shall apply only as to those streets within an area of the city
declared by the City Commission to be an underground utility district.
      (3)   Overhead electrical and communications distribution and service
poles supporting lines carrying less than 34,500 volts shall not be installed
to support overhead facilities, where such installation would duplicate an
existing pole line within an entire city block.
      (4)   Electric and communication service wires or cables to any new
building or structure shall be placed underground.
      (5)   Exceptions:
         A.   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
         B.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixture and extended from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building on
the same lot or parcel without crossing any street.
         C.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surfaced-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted
terminal boxes, and meter cabinets and concealed ducts.
         D.   Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets,
pedestals, ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such
underground and street lighting facilities may be placed above ground within
the street or other public place as appropriate.
         E   All facilities reasonably necessary to connect underground
facilities to existing or permitted overhead or above ground facilities.
         F.   Overhead electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and
overhead communication long distance, trunk and feeder lines, existing or new.
 
1135.23  RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION AND COMMUNITY CENTER. 
   A religious institution shall be subject to the following specific
requirements:
   (a)   A religious institution or community center shall be located with
access to an arterial street as identified on the Land Use Plan map or on a
street pavement wider than 30 feet.
   (b)   The following dimensional requirements shall be applicable only to the
construction of a new building:
      (1)   Minimum lot area:  40,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum yards:  Two and one-quarter (2.25) feet of horizontal
distance shall be provided for each one (1) foot of building height measured
between the nearest point of any lot line and the nearest point from which the
height is measured.
         (Ord. 09-94. Passed 4-14-09.)
 
1135.24  SALVAGE YARD.
   A salvage yard shall be subject to the following specific requirements:
   (a)    No operation shall be permitted closer than 1,000 feet to any R
district.
   (b)   All outdoor storage shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
fence, wall or other solid screen.  Solid gates shall be provided at driveway
areas.  Such enclosures shall be constructed on or inside the front, side and
rear lot lines and shall be constructed in such a manner that no outdoor
storage or salvage operations shall be visible from an adjacent property,
street or highway.  Storage, either temporary or permanent, between such fence
or wall and any property line is expressly prohibited.  Junk or salvage
materials shall not form part of the fence, be piled higher than the height of
the fence, nor be placed against the fence.
   (c)   For fire protection, an unobstructed firebreak eight (8) feet in width
shall be maintained around the entire salvage yard.
   (d)   The storage of rags, paper and similar combustible waste shall not be
closer than 100 feet to any property line, unless enclosed in a masonry
building of not less than four-hour fire resistive construction.
 
1135.25  SATELLITE RECEIVING DEVICE.
   A satellite receiving device in R Districts shall be subject to the
following specific requirements:
   (a)   The device shall not be located in the area between the street and the
building line; in the side yard where abutting a lot in an R district; nor on
the roof or attached to the side of any building, except for a device less than
two (2) feet in diameter.
   (b)   The device shall be securely mounted to withstand high winds as
determined by the Chief Building Official or his designee.
   (c)   The device shall not be located within utility easements or otherwise
interfere with city utilities unless approved by the City Engineer.
 
1135.26  ANIMALS.
   Livestock and animals shall be allowed on parcels only as follows:
   (a)   Domestic dogs, domestic cats, fish, and honeybees (apis mellifera) may
be kept on parcels of any size.
      (1)   Requirements for bee hives:
         a.   Each parcel is permitted up to two hives.
         b.   Hives shall be placed in rear yards only.
         c.   All hives shall be registered with the Ohio Department of
Agriculture and shall comply with all requirements set forth in ORC Chapter
909.
         d.   Hives must be screened:
            1.   With a minimum six (6) foot high flyway barrier around hives.
            2.   The flyway barrier shall consist of a solid wall, fence, dense
vegetation, or combination thereof.
            3.   The flyway barrier shall extend ten (10) feet beyond the hive
in each direction along the ground.
   (b)   All other livestock and non-carnivorous animals shall only be kept on
parcels three acres or more.  Livestock and non-carnivorous animals kept on
parcels of three acres or more shall be kept in an appropriately fenced area. 
      (1)   Structures for fowl or small animals shall not be less than 100
feet distant from every abutting property line in an R district, while
structures for horses, cattle, sheep, goats, and other large livestock shall be
not less than 200 feet from every abutting property line in an R district.
   (c)   Carnivorous animals, other than domestic dogs, domestic cats, and
fish, are not permitted in the city, except as part of a licensed circus or
exhibition.
      (Ord. 17-243.  Passed 10-10-17.)
 
1135.27  CARGO CONTAINERS.
   (a)   Definition.  As used in this section, "cargo container" shall mean a
standardized, reusable weatherproof fully enclosed box-like structure
constructed with doors, originally designed for the shipment or storage of
freight or other goods, and commonly designed for or is capable of being
mounted on a railroad car, a chassis or bogie for movement by truck, and/or a
ship.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
   (b)   Cargo containers may not be used for warehouse/storage as the primary
use of a property.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
   (c)   Cargo containers 120 square fee or smaller in size may be used as
temporary structures.  As such, they may not be placed in front or side yard
required setbacks.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
   (d)   Cargo containers exceeding 120 square feet are allowed in
residentially zoned districts only if in active use for the storage of
construction materials for ongoing permitted construction, or for a maximum
period of seven consecutive days in association with the relocation of the
contents of a residential structure.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
   (e)   Cargo containers exceeding 120 square feet are allowed in commercially
zoned districts only as a conditional use.  They may not be located in any
setback required by zoning, nor be placed upon required parking, nor may their
combined area exceed 7% of the floor area of the permanent structures on the
site.  They cannot be stacked.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
   (f)   Cargo containers exceeding 120 square feet are allowed as accessory
uses in industrially zoned districts.  They may be stacked two high.
(Ord. 04-132.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1136
Wireless Communication Facilities
 
(Chapter enacted through Ordinance No. 06-425, passed December 5, 2006.)
 
1136.01   Purpose and Objectives.
1136.02   Definitions.
1136.03   Conditional use permit required.
1136.04   Applications for conditional use permit.
1136.05   General contents of application.
1136.06   Technical certifications.
1136.07   Required demonstrations.
1136.08   Review of application.
1136.09   Standards for facilities.
1136.10   Permit to be granted.
1136.11   Effect of granting permit.
1136.12   Continuing obligations of holder of permit.
1136.13   Required insurance.
1136.14   Fees and deposit.
1136.15   Removal of facility.
1136.16   Assurance of removal.
 
1136.01 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities protects the City's health, safety,
public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the
community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life
specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter, the City hereby adopts an
overall policy with respect to a conditional use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the
following goals:
   (a)   Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a
conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities;
   (b)   Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both
fair and consistent;
   (c)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-
location of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers;
   (d)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height
and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner,
including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse
aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other
facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (e)   Making available to residents an appropriate level of wireless
communication services while employing the least visually and physically
intrusive means that are not technologically or commercially impracticable
under the facts and circumstances.
 
1136.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the context of
a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future
tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory, and not merely directory.
   (a)   "Wireless Telecommunication Accessory Facility or Structure" means an
accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with
wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot
as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to,
utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
   (b)   "Commercial Impracticability" or "Commercially Impracticable" means
the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the
cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or
foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The
inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit,
standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercially impracticable"
and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially
impracticable."
   (c)   "Completed Application" means an application that contains all
information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made
with respect to an application.
   (d)   "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
   (e)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
   (f)   "Height" means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance
measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection
device.
   (g)   "NIER" means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
   (h)   "Propagation study" means a report showing the transmission
characteristics of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility which
includes such information as the City shall require.
   (i)   "Personal Wireless Facility" means a "Wireless Telecommunications
Facility" used in the provision of "Personal Wireless Services."
   (j)   "Personal Wireless Services" or "PWS" or "Personal Telecommunications
Service" or "PCS" shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996
Telecommunications Act.
   (k)   "Telecommunication Site."  See definition for "Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities."
   (l)   "Conditional Use Permit" means the official document or permit by
which an applicant is allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications
facilities as granted or issued by the City.
   (m)   "State" means the State of Ohio.
   (n)   "Stealth" or "Stealth Technology" means to employ methods to minimize
adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and
other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as
the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities by using
the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not
technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.
   (o)   "Telecommunications" means the transmission and/or reception of audio,
video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
   (p)   "Telecommunications Structure" means a structure used in the provision
of services described in the definition of "Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities."
   (q)   "Wireless Telecommunications Facility" includes a "Telecommunications
Structure", "Telecommunications Site" and "Personal Wireless Facility" and
means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or
used to support antennas or other devices for transmitting or receiving
wireless signals. A "Wireless Telecommunications Facility" includes, without
limit, antennas and towers of all types and kinds and structures, whether
installed on or in existing structures such as a multi-story building, church
steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other structures, or constructed free
standing, including all related facilities such as cabling, equipment shelters
and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility
intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging,
911, personal telecommunications services, commercial satellite services,
microwave services and services not licensed by the FCC.  "Wireless
Communication Facility" does not include structures used exclusively for the
City's fire or police or exclusively for private, noncommercial radio and
television reception, private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar
noncommercial telecommunications where the height of the facility is below the
height limits set forth in this chapter.
 
1136.03  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No wireless telecommunications facility shall be constructed within
the City unless and until a conditional use permit shall have been issued
authorizing such construction unless the City Manager or designee has issued a
written determination that the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility
has no appreciable impact under subsection (c) below.
 
   (b)   Any wireless communication facility lawfully constructed within the
City prior to the adoption of this ordinance, is a non-conforming use, unless
and until a conditional use permit shall have been issued with respect to such
wireless communication facility.
 
   (c)   If the City Manager determines, based on a written request
(application), that due to the size, location and similar characteristics and
due to the operating characteristics of the proposed facility, the proposed
facility will have no appreciable visual or other impact upon the neighborhood
in which it is to be located and no detrimental effect on existing
telecommunication broadcasting and receiving, the City Manager may issue a
written determination to that effect. The application for a determination of no
appreciable impact shall be accompanied by such information as the City Manager
may require to evaluate the impact of the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility. The City Manager may require the applicant for a determination of no
appreciable impact to provide all or a portion of the information specified in
Sections
1136.05 and 1136.06 of this Chapter. An application for a determination of no
appreciable impact shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person
preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made
therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. Such a
determination shall not be made with respect to a proposed new tower.
 
   (d)   A conditional Use Permit shall not be required for location of a
Wireless Telecommunication facility in the City's rights of way.  Such
facilities must conform to the City's ordinances rules and procedures governing
the rights of way.
(Ord. No. 12-8. Passed 1-17-12.)
 
1136.04  APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (a)   Applications for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the
Department of Community Development on such forms as the City Manager shall
prescribe.
 
   (b)   An application for a conditional use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the
person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the
information. The landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign
the application. At the discretion of the City, any false or misleading
statement in the application may result in denial of the application without
further consideration or opportunity for correction.
 
   (c)   Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or that are
otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the City.
 
1136.05  GENERAL CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   All applications for a conditional use permit with respect to a wireless
communication facility shall contain the following:
   (a)   Conditional Use Application (Section
1172.05);
   (b)   Co-location of a wireless telecommunications facility on existing
structure
      (1)   Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless
telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within
the City. Such documentation shall include propagation studies of the proposed
site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites;
      (2)   A plot plan shall indicate all building and land uses within two
hundred (200) feet of the proposed facility.  Aerial photos and/or renderings
may augment the plot plan.
      (3)   The location of the nearest residential structure;
      (4)   The location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennae
and all appurtenant structures;
      (5)   The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(s) proposed
and the basis for the calculations of the tower's capacity to accommodate
multiple users. The applicant shall list the location of every tower, building,
or structure within a reasonably proximity that could support the proposed
antenna; 
      (6)   A description of the proposed antenna(s) and all related  fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing
grade, materials, color and lighting;
      (7)   A "Zone of Visibility Map" which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the antenna may be seen;
      (8)   Pictorial representations of "before" and "after" views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of the City, as may be appropriate,
including but not limited to state highways and other major roads; state and
local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic
sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the site
is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will
be provided concerning the appropriate key sites at a pre-application meeting,
if requested by the applicant.
   (c)    Telecommunications Structures: In addition to the general contents
for co-location set forth in subsection (b) above, an applicant for a new
telecommunication structure shall also submit,
      (1)   The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping, and fencing;
      (2)   A comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other
suitable structures within 4 miles of the location of any proposed new tower,
unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable;
      (3)   The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna(s);
      (4)   An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires 
and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as
relates to the need or appropriateness of screening.
      (5)   Proof of the availability of the insurance required under Section
1136.13 and the removal bond required under Section
1136.15.
   (d)   If applicant petitions recognition of no appreciable impact under
Section
1136.03(c), then please submit a statement of no appreciable impact directed to
City Manager.
   (e)   Technical Certification data according to Section 1136.06 below.
   (f)   Statement of demonstration of necessity according to conditions set
forth in Section
1136.07 below.
 
1136.06  TECHNICAL CERTIFICATIONS.
   All applications for a conditional use permit with respect to a wireless
communication facility shall contain, the following, each certified by an
engineer or other professional licensed as appropriate to that item:
   (a)   A topographic and geomorphologic study and analysis taking into
account the subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, assuring
the stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities on the
proposed site.
   (b)   The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
   (c)   The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective radiated
power of the antenna(s);
   (d)   The direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the antenna
(s);
   (e)   Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are within the
threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
   (f)   Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause interference
with other telecommunications devices;
   (g)   A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
 
1136.07  REQUIRED DEMONSTRATIONS.
   The application shall contain demonstrations that the granting of the
application will further the objectives stated in Section
1136.01 above.  Such demonstrations shall include:
   (a)   A demonstration the need for the wireless telecommunications facility
to provide service primarily and essentially within the City. Such
demonstration shall include propagation studies of the proposed site and all
adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites;
   (b)   In the case of a new tower, a demonstration that the proposed facility
has been sited and designed so as to employ the least visually and physically
intrusive means that are not commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.  Such report must include evidence that fair and thorough
consideration was given to the following:
      (1)   Sharing an existing tower or other facility with another provider,
      (2)   Locating the facility atop or within an existing structure,
      (3)   Locating the facility upon publicly owned land,
      (4)   Making any new tower accessible to co-location of additional
antennas of other providers,
      (5)   Locating the facility so as to minimize the impact upon the
following types of Zoning Districts in the following order:
         (A)   Historical Districts,
         (B)   Single Family Residential Districts,
         (C)   Multi-Family Residential Districts,
         (D)   Commercial Districts,
         (E)   Manufacturing and Industrial Districts,
      (6)   Minimizing the height of towers and other structures,
      (7)   Employing camouflage or other stealth technology.
   (c)   A demonstration of the ability of any proposed new tower to
accommodate future demand for at least five additional commercial applications,
such as future co-locations, without causing interference. This requirement may
be waived, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the provisions of
future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is
commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden,
based upon:
      (1)   The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
      (2)   The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed.
   (d)   Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall
not be accepted as a valid basis for a claim of commercial impracticability or
hardship.  An assertion that the proposed site is the only site under option or
lease shall not be accepted as a valid basis for a claim of commercial
impracticability or hardship.
 
1136.08  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   The City Manager shall designate such persons as the City Manager
deems appropriate to review, analyze, and evaluate applications and supporting
materials. The City Manager may, at his discretion, delegate or designate other
official agencies of the City or consultants employed by the City to accept,
review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations with respect to granting or
not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking conditional use
permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
 
   (b)   If after review of the "Zone of Visibility Map" submitted under
Section
1136.05 (b)(7) above, the City determines that the proposed facility is likely
to have adverse visual or aesthetic impact, the City may require the applicant
to perform a balloon test at the applicant's expense, described as follows:
      (1)   The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast,
a minimum of a 3 foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum
height of the proposed new tower.
      (2)   The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on
the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised
by the applicant 7 and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper
with a general circulation in the City.
      (3)   The applicant shall inform the City, in writing, of the dates and
times of the test, at least 14 days in advance.
      (4)   The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours
sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date
shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the
secondary date may be on a weekday.
 
1136.09  STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES.
   A conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility will be
granted only when the facility complies with the following standards:
   (a)   The base and all related facilities and structures of the proposed
wireless telecommunications facilities will be effectively screened from view.
   (b)   All utilities at the site shall be installed underground and in
compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City,
including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code
and the National Electrical Code where appropriate.
   (c)   Access roads, turn-around space and parking have been provided to
assure adequate emergency and service access.
   (d)   Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall  be
made to the extent practicable.
   (e)   Road construction shall minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of
vegetation.
   (f)   Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal
visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
   (g)   Any new tower to be constructed on the site shall be no higher than
necessary, and in no case, higher than one hundred ninety feet (190) above
existing grade.
   (h)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.
   (i)   Towers shall be galvanized and painted with a rust-preventive    paint
of a noncontrasting gray or similar color to harmonize with the surroundings
and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (j)   All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be 
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
Specifically:
      (1)   All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in
such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and
      (2)   Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be
installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons
authorized to operate or service them.
   (k)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger
than 4 square feet located near the base of the tower in order to provide
adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of an
antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain the name(s) of the
owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s), as well as emergency phone number
(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and
be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment
owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless lighting
is required by applicable law, rule or regulation. No other signage, including
advertising, shall be permitted.
   (l)   All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications
facility structures shall be set back from any residential property line a
minimum of a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 50% of the height of the tower or
structure.
   (m)   All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications
facility structures shall be set back from any nonresidential property line a
minimum of a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 25% of the height of the tower or
structure.
 
1136.10  PERMIT TO BE GRANTED.
   A conditional-use permit with respect to a wireless telecommunications
facility shall be granted when
   (a)   All of the following criteria (1) through (4) are met:
      (1)   The City reasonably determines that granting the application will
serve the objectives set forth in Section
1136.01 above;
      (2)   The City reasonably determines that the applicant has clearly and
convincingly demonstrated the matters required by Section
1136.07 above;
      (3)   The application shows compliance with the standards set forth in
Section
1136.09 above; and
      (4)   The application demonstrates compliance with other applicable
provisions of the Zoning Code.
   (b)   Or, if the conditional use permit application is for the modification
of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of the tower or base station and involves a collocation of
new transmission equipment or removal of transmission equipment or replacement
of transmission equipment, then a conditional-use permit shall be granted for
the collocation, removal, and/or replacement.
      (Ord. 12-176. Passed 06-05-12.)
 
1136.11  EFFECT OF GRANTING PERMIT.
   A permit granted under Section
1136.10 above shall entitle the holder to construct a wireless
telecommunication facility upon the issuance of a building permit obtained from
the Chief Building Official, and to operate the facility for a period of five
(5) years from the date of issuance, subject to compliance with the provisions
of Section
1136.12 below.
 
1136.12 CONTINUING OBLIGATIONS OF HOLDER OF PERMIT.
   The holder of a permit granted under Section
1136.10 above shall:
   (a)   Maintain the facility in continuous operation. "Continuous operation"
means that the facility has not been inactive for a period in excess of sixty
(60) consecutive calendar days, unless such inactivity has been caused by an
Act of God, or force majuere, and repair or reconstruction has commenced within
such sixty (60) day period;
   (b)   Operate and maintain the facility in accordance with the terms of the
application, and any applicable license issued by the FCC;
   (c)   Maintain in full force and effect the liability and other insurance
required under the terms of Section
1136.13;
   (d)   Negotiate in good faith for the shared use of any tower by other
wireless service providers in the future, and shall:
      (1)   Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant;
      (2)   Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications
provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include,
but are not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and
maintenance financing, return on equity less depreciation, and all of the costs
of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
   (e)   Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for
revocation of the conditional use permit for the facility.
 
1136.13  REQUIRED INSURANCE.
   (a)   A holder of a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance
coverage, for the duration of the conditional use permit in amounts as set
forth below:
      (1)   Commercial General Liability covering personal injuries, death and
property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence; $2,000,000 aggregate;
 
   (b)   The Commercial General Liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the City and its officers, boards, employees, committee members,
attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named insureds.
 
   (c)   The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance  company  licensed  to do business in the  State and with a
Best's rating of at least A.
 
   (d)   The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30 days prior written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
 
   (e)   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to
the City at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such
policies are to renew or replace.
 
   (f)   Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the granting
of the conditional use permit, the holder of the conditional use permit shall
deliver to the City a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing
the insurance in the required amounts.
 
1136.14  FEES AND DEPOSIT.
   (a)   At the time that a person submits an application for a conditional use
permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a non-refundable application fee
of $5,000.00 to the City. If the application is for a conditional use permit
for co-locating on an existing tower or other suitable structure, where no
increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the non-refundable
fee shall be $2,000.00.  At the time that a person submits an application for a
determination of no appreciable impact, such person shall pay a non-refundable
fee of $1,000.00 to the City.
 
   (b)   No application fee is required in order to rectify a conditional use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a
visible modification of the wireless telecommunications facility since the date
of the issuance of the existing conditional use permit for which the conditions
of the conditional use permit have not previously been modified. In the case of
any modification, the fees provided in division (a) shall apply.
 
   (c)   In addition to the non-refundable application fee set forth in
subsection (a) above, as required, an applicant shall deposit with the City
funds sufficient to reimburse the City for all reasonable costs of consultant
and expert evaluation and consultation to the City in connection with the
review of any application, including the construction and modification of the
site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500.00. The placement of
the $8,500.00 with the City shall precede the pre-application meeting. The City
will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The City's
consultants/experts shall invoice the City for services in reviewing the
application, including the construction and modification of the site, once
permitted. If at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance
less than $2,500.00, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the
City, replenish the escrow account so that it has a balance of at least
$5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the City before
any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event
that the amount held in escrow by the City is more than the amount of the
actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall
be promptly refunded to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 12-8. Passed 1-17-12.)
 
1136.15  REMOVAL OF FACILITY.
   The City may require that a telecommunication facility be removed upon the
occurrence of any of the following events:
   (a)   The facility was not constructed in accordance with any applicable
permit,
   (b)   The facility has deteriorated from lack of maintenance or other cause
so that it has become a danger to public safety,
   (c)   More than ninety days have elapsed since the expiration of the
facility's conditional use permit and no application for renewal is pending,
   (d)   The facility has been inactive for a period of at least ninety (90)
consecutive calendar days,
   (e)   The holder of the conditional use permit has not fulfilled the
holder's continuing obligations under Section
1136.12 above.
 
1136.16  ASSURANCE OF REMOVAL.
   (a)   In order to assure the prompt removal of a wireless communication
facility when required by the City in accordance with Section
1136.15 above, the City shall require the holder of a conditional use permit to
maintain in full force and effect a removal bond.  A removal bond shall:
      (1)   Be written by a surety company authorized to do business in the
State;
      (2)   Be in an amount sufficient to pay the cost of removal of the
facility, and not less than $75,000;
      (3)   Provide that upon written notice from the City Manager to the
surety company and the holder that the City has caused the removal of the
facility, the surety shall pay to the order of the City the City's cost of
removal of the facility, up to and including the maximum amount of the bond.
 
   (b)   In the event that the bond required under subsection (a) above is
unavailable or insufficient to pay the City's cost of removal, the City may
issue an assessment in the amount of its removal costs against the parcel or
parcels of real estate upon which the facility was located, in accordance with
law.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1140
PD Planned Development District
 
1140.01   Purpose.
1140.02   Definitions.
1140.03   Lands eligible for inclusion in a PD district.
1140.04   PD ordinance and master development plan design.
1140.05   The application for rezoning as a PD district.
1140.06   Procedure for review and and approval of PD district preliminary
master development plans and establishment of a PD district.
1140.07   Implementation of the PD ordinance.
1140.08   Administration of the PD ordinance.
 
1140.01  PURPOSE.
   (a)   This Chapter establishes the procedures for review and adoption of
Planned Development (PD) districts.  A Planned Development: (1) is a concept
which requires land to be under unified control, planned and developed as a
whole in a single development or in an approved, programmed series of
developments; (2) is governed by a PD Ordinance which becomes the zoning
regulation for the land to which the PD Ordinance is applied and may also
include subdivision regulations to govern the land; (3) includes principal and
accessory structures substantially related to the character of the development
itself and the surrounding area of which it is a part; and (4) is a concept
which, when implemented, allows for development according to comprehensive and
detailed plans which may include not only streets, utilities, building sites,
and the like, but also site plans for all buildings as intended to be located,
constructed, used, and related to each other, and detailed plans for other uses
and improvements on the land.
 
   (b)   The purpose of the PD district is to provide for zoning and
subdivision regulation of Planned Developments to allow more flexible design of
single use residential, commercial or industrial uses developments as well as
allow modern integrated developments of mixed residential, commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural uses, with such Planned Developments
regulated so as to be in substantial conformity with the Clark County
Comprehensive Land Use Plan (commonly known as the Crossroads Plan) adopted by
the City, with the City's Thoroughfare Plan and with the purposes established
in Section
1101.02 of the Springfield Zoning Code, and so as to not have substantially
adverse effects on neighboring areas which outweigh the benefits to the
community derived from the Planned Development.  In addition, the regulation of
Planned Developments under this Chapter is intended to further the following
purposes:
      (1)   To provide flexibility in architectural design, placement and
clustering of buildings, use of open space, provision of traffic circulation
facilities and parking, and related site development considerations;
      (2)   To provide for the preservation and best use of existing landscape
features and environment characteristics through development sensitive to and
protective of the natural features of the PD district and the surrounding area
in a harmonious fashion;
      (3)   To promote efficient land use with smaller networks of utilities
and streets;
      (4)   To provide a more flexible zoning mechanism to facilitate
redeveloping older residential areas and to encourage infill development;
      (5)   To enable the creation of a more desirable environment than would
be possible through  application of the regulations in the City's conventional
zoning districts;
      (6)   To provide a comprehensive planning process and an integrated body
of regulation for zoning and subdivision control of each Planned Development;
      (7)   To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation
facilities, open spaces and other public, private and common amenities than
would otherwise be provided under conventional land use development regulation;
      (8)   To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and
building relationships within Planned Developments;
      (9)   To provide for appropriate land covenants, easements and financial
assurances and security to ensure completion of public improvements, completion
of construction of Planned Development phases, long term maintenance of common
areas and other amenities in Planned Developments, long term maintenance and
preservation of Planned Development features intended to mitigate adverse
effects on neighboring areas and areas within the Planned Development and
preservation of the attributes of the Planned Development necessary to
integration of the uses permitted therein;
      (10)   To provide for the integration of diverse uses in a manner that
will allow the uses to complement each other and that will promote convenience
of access to various uses by the community within and near the Planned
Development;
      (11)   To provide aesthetically pleasing development which will foster a
livable environment in the Springfield community and which will promote the
public welfare;
      (12)   To provide a flexibility in zoning and subdivision regulation that
will incentivise developers to opt for pursuing a planned development subject
to more comprehensive municipal regulation, even though the developer may incur
increased early development costs associated with undertaking the PD district
planning process.
 
1140.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter, unless a
contrary meaning is indicated by the text:
   (a)   Applicant.  An applicant is a person who files a petition for a zoning
amendment to establish a PD district under this Chapter.  A person who holds a
contractual right to become the owner of a freehold estate in land proposed to
be made subject to a PD Ordinance adopted under this Chapter may be an
applicant.  All owners of freehold estates in the lands proposed to be made
subject to the PD Ordinance adopted under this Chapter must be co-applicant
parties to the application made under this Chapter.
   (b)   Buffer.  A buffer is a landscaped area, fence, wall or other barrier
along the perimeter of a PD district boundary, between land use categories
within a PD district, or between incompatible uses within a PD district.
   (c)   Common Open Space.  Common open space is an area of land, an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a PD district which is for the
benefit of or open to use by multiple occupants of the PD district.
   (d)   Compatibility.  The ability of land a use to coexist with surrounding
land uses in a stable fashion over time such that none of the uses are
subjected to substantially adverse effects which outweigh the benefits to the
community derived from the uses being permitted to exist in proximity to each
other and which will not result in an existing lawful use becoming impractical
as a result of its proximity to the proposed new use.
   (e)   Gross Density.  Gross Density for residential uses is the total number
of dwelling units divided by the total number of acres designated for
residential uses within the perimeter boundaries of a PD district. Gross
density for non-residential uses is determined by the floor area ratio.
   (f)   Master Development Plan.  A Master Development Plan is the set of
documents describing the attributes of a Planned Development, including:
      (1)   The PD Ordinance to govern the Planned Development, which shall
include the zoning regulations to govern the Planned Development, which shall
include standards by which the Planning Board will administer the PD Ordinance,
which may include subdivision regulations which, as to the Planned Development,
will be in addition to and which, to the extent they vary from the subdivision
regulations in Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances, shall supersede the
subdivision regulations in Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances and which
shall include an amendment to the Zoning Map of Springfield, Ohio;
      (2)   A plot plan of subdivision characteristics and other attributes of
the Planned development (the Master Development Plan plat map is not the same
as the plat submitted for subdivision approval);
      (3)   Any declaration of land covenants required to accomplish the
purposes of this Chapter as pertaining to the Planned Development;
      (4)   Any conveyance of easements or other interests in real estate
required to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter as pertaining to the
Planned development;
      (5)   Any financial assurances and security or other mechanisms required
to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter as pertaining to the Planned
Development; and
      (6)   Any other required conditions relating to use, location and bulk of
building, density of development, common open space, and public facilities
within the Planned Development.
   (g)   Net Commercial Acreage.  Net Commercial Acreage is the total number of
acres within the perimeter boundaries of a PD district, excluding areas devoted
to streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public, private and common open
space, recreation, and other permitted non-commercial and office uses.
   (h)   Net Office Acreage.  Net Office Acreage is the total number of acres
within the perimeter boundaries of a PD district, excluding areas devoted to
streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public, private and common open
space, recreation, and other permitted non-office uses.
   (i)   Net Industrial Acreage.  Net Commercial Acreage is the total number of
acres within the perimeter boundaries of a PD district, excluding areas devoted
to streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public, private and common open
space, recreation, and other permitted non-industrial uses.
   (j)   Net Residential Acreage.  Net Residential Acreage is the total number
of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a PD district, excluding areas
devoted to streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public, private and common
open space, recreation, and other permitted non-residential uses.
   (k)   Preliminary Master Development Plan.  A Preliminary Master Development
Plan is a Master Development Plan proposed by the applicant and made a part of
the application, as required by this Chapter, to be submitted to the Planning
Board for their consideration.
   (l)   Substantial Construction.  Substantial construction is achieved at the
point in development when all required permits necessary to build a Planned
Development phase have been obtained and actual construction of public
improvements, or stormwater management systems on the Planned Development phase
is either complete or in active progress.
   (m)   Undeveloped Area.  Undeveloped area is the area within a PD district
where agriculture or recreation uses in open areas may be continued.
 
1140.03  LANDS ELIGIBLE FOR INCLUSION IN A PD DISTRICT.
   (a)   A PD district shall be comprised only of contiguous lands forming a
single, cohesive area to be developed as a unit, either at one time or in
phases.  No PD district may surround an island of land not included as part of
the PD district.
 
   (b)   No PD district shall be established unless all owners of freehold
estates in the lands included within the proposed PD district have given their
consent, in writing, to the establishment of the proposed PD district and to
their lands being made subject to the PD Ordinance to be adopted by the City
Commission and to the terms of the Master Development Plan related thereto and
unless all such owners have provided all legally binding instruments the City
Commission finds are necessary to the enforcement of long term obligations
imposed under the said PD Ordinance and Master Development Plan.
 
1140.04  PD ORDINANCE AND MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN DESIGN.
   (a)   This section is intended to provide guidance to the City staff in
assisting applicants wishing to petition for establishment of a PD district and
to provide guidance to the Planning Board in its consideration of and
adjustment of a Preliminary Master Development Plan and in designing a PD
Ordinance to be recommended to the City Commission, if a PD district is to be
recommended.
 
   (b)   The Planning Board shall consider the following matters in reviewing
and adjusting a Master Development Plan and designing a PD Ordinance to be
recommended to the City Commission:
      (1)   Whether the proposed PD district meets the qualifications of
Section
1140.03.
      (2)   What permitted uses are appropriate for the proposed PD district;
      (3)   Compliance with stormwater regulations;
      (4)   Conformance to density policies established by the Clark County
Comprehensive Land Use Plan or by the City Commission;
      (5)   The location and sizing of buildings so as to provide adequate
light and ventilation to protect the health of the occupants and users of the
Planned Development;
      (6)   The location and sizing of buildings so as to provide necessary
access for fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles;
      (7)   The location and sizing of buildings so as to provide a reasonable
degree of privacy for residents and occupants of the Planned Development;
      (8)   Establishing appropriate setback and yard requirements for the
proposed Planned Development;
      (9)   Ingress and egress for the proposed Planned Development from and to
public thoroughfares and traffic circulation within the proposed PD district
and avoidance of overburdening existing public thoroughfares;
      (10)   Establishing appropriate open space for recreation and to
establish an attractive environment that is beneficial to the public health,
safety and welfare;
      (11)   Determine whether appropriate land will be dedicated to public use
for public roadways, public utilities, public recreation facilities and public
parks;
      (12)   The location and sizing of public utilities within the proposed PD
district to ensure adequate service within the proposed PD district and to
avoid overburdening existing public utilities;
      (13)   The use of and design of buffers within and on the boundary of the
proposed PD district to separate uses and to mitigate substantially adverse
effects on property within the proposed PD district and on property in
neighboring areas and compliance of buffers with Chapter
1156 of the Springfield Zoning Code;
      (14)   The provision of adequate parking, the location of parking
facilities and whether off-street parking should be permitted which deviates
from the requirements of Chapter
1153 of the Springfield Zoning Code;
      (15)   The grouping of buildings and the variety and design of building
types;
      (16)   The compatibility of land uses within the proposed PD district and
the compatibility of land uses permitted in the proposed PD district with
lawful land uses existing in neighboring areas;
      (17)   The impact of land uses within the proposed PD district on
environmental features of the proposed PD district which are to be preserved
and on environmental features in neighboring areas;
      (18)   The need for limitation on land uses within the proposed PD
district in furtherance of the purposes of this Chapter and the compatibility
of land uses within the proposed PD district and with land uses in neighboring
area;
      (19)   The form of ownership interests intended for the Planned
Development;
      (20)   Access to public transportation systems;
      (21)   The location and design of landscaping within the proposed PD
district and compliance with Chapter
1158 of the Springfield Zoning Code;
      (22)   The location and design of signs within the proposed PD district
and compliance with Chapter
1155 of the Springfield Zoning Code;
      (23)   The appropriate size for subdivision lots within the proposed PD
district for the various uses permitted within the proposed PD district;
      (24)   Every lot within the proposed PD district is required to have
access to a public thoroughfare either directly or by means of a private road;
      (25)   Streets within the proposed PD district, public or private, are
required to conform to the minimum requirements of Part Twelve of the Codified
Ordinances and to the specifications for public roadway structures adopted by
the City Engineer, whether the roadway is public or private, but alleys may
deviated from the minimum requirements of
Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances if the City Fire Chief determines that
such deviation will not prevent access to abutting properties by fire
apparatus;
      (26)   How is development of the proposed PD district to be completed in
progressive phases and whether the proposed schedule  development of the PD
district is practical and will accomplish build out of phases of the Planned
Development within a reasonable time;
      (27)   What land covenants, easements, other interests in real estate and
financial assurances and security are necessary to ensure completion of public
improvements, completion of construction of the Planned Development phases,
long term maintenance of common areas and other amenities in the Planned
Development, long term maintenance and preservation of Planned Development
features intended to mitigate adverse effects on neighboring areas and areas
within the Planned Development and preservation of the attributes of the
Planned Development necessary to integration of the uses permitted in the
proposed PD district;
      (28)   What precautions are to be taken to preserve environmental
attributes of the proposed PD district which are to be retained and on
environmental features in neighboring areas;
      (29)   What standards should the PD Ordinance contain to govern exercise
of Planning Board discretion in administering the PD Ordinance and approving
modifications to the Master Development Plan over time; and
      (30)   What uses should be specifically prohibited within the proposed PD
district.
 
1140.05  THE APPLICATION FOR REZONING AS A PD DISTRICT.
   (a)   The applicant seeking to have land rezoned as a PD district shall
submit to the Planning and Zoning Administrator six (6) copies of a PD Rezoning
Application which shall include the following:
 
   (b)   An opinion of an attorney at law, licensed to practice in Ohio, which
is addressed to The City of Springfield, Ohio and upon which the City may rely,
containing a good and sufficient legal description of the lands which are the
subject of the application [as required in subdivision (c)(3) of this Section]
and stating all owners of freehold estates in such lands.  If one or more
applicants is a holder of a contractual right to become an owner of a freehold
estate in such lands, then the application shall also include a true copy of
the document establishing such contractual right and an opinion of an attorney
at law, licensed to practice in Ohio, which is addressed to The City of
Springfield, Ohio and upon which the City may rely, verifying that the said
document is legally binding on the parties thereto in accordance with the terms
of such document.
 
   (c)   A Preliminary Master Development Plan which shall include the
following exhibits:
      (1)   A statement of objectives for the Planned Development, describing:
         A.   The general purpose of the proposed Planned Development;
         B.   The general character of the proposed Planned Development;
         C.   The proposed permitted and prohibited uses for the proposed PD
district; and
         D.   The rational supporting the assumptions and choices made by the
applicant.
      (2)   A vicinity map drawn to a scale to show an area of no less than one
thousand (1,000) feet surrounding the proposed PD district (a larger area may
be required if the  Planning Board determines that information on a larger
vicinity is needed to properly review the application) showing the location of
the proposed Planned Development in relation to:
         A.   Existing streets and thoroughfares, showing the location and size
of all existing utilities facilities, including drainage, water, sewer,
electrical, and fire hydrants;
         B.   Existing public and private facilities, including but not limited
to, schools, recreation areas, public utility facilities, stormwater detention
facilities and police and fire stations;
         C.   Existing zoning and existing land uses on the proposed PD
district site and on surrounding areas; and
         D.   Existing easements on the proposed PD district site;
      (3)   A boundary survey plat map and good and sufficient legal
description of the lands which are the subject of the application (such legal
description being compliant with the requirements of the Clark County, Ohio
County Engineer for conveying interests in real estate).
      (4)   A topographic survey using the most recent United States Geological
Service topographic survey if more detailed topographic information is not
available.
      (5)   A site analysis map drawn to the same scale as the Preliminary
Master Development Plan plat map, described below, which shall indicate flood
prone areas, areas with slopes greater than five percent (5%), areas of soils
which are marginally suited for development purposes and a tree survey
(including tree cover, existing vegetation and other natural areas of
significance as indicated in an accompanying Natural Area Inventory prepared by
an ecologist or similarly trained environmental specialist).
      (6)   A Preliminary Master Development Plan plot plan drawn to a scale
suitable to clearly depict the following characteristics of the proposed PD
district (the scale for the vicinity map being a minimum standard):
         A.   Proposed land uses within the proposed PD district and their
location;
         B.   Proposed lot sizes within the proposed PD district, indicated
either by lot lines drawn in their proposed location or a statement on the face
of the Preliminary Master Development Plan concerning proposed lot sizes,
including minimum lot sizes;
         C.   Proposed building setbacks defining the distance buildings will
be set back from:
            (i)   Property lines surrounding the proposed PD district;
            (ii)   Proposed and existing streets and alleys, identified as
either public or private;
            (iii)   Other proposed buildings;
            (iv)   The center line of ditches, streams, creeks and the high
water line of lakes and ponds;
            (v)   Lot lines within the proposed PD district; and
            (vi)   Other man-made or natural features which would be affected
by building encroachment.
         D.   Proposed maximum height of buildings within the proposed PD
district;
         E.   Proposed common open spaces, the intended purposes and uses of
such common open spaces, their location and size and the parameters limiting
use of such common open spaces;
         F.   Arterial and collector streets and thoroughfares, if any, and
point(s) of connection for access roads to the Planned Development;
         G.   Local access streets and interior circulation roadways, paths and
trails, public and private, vehicular and pedestrian, within the proposed PD
district;
         H.   Proposed common outside storage areas, their location and size
and the parameters limiting use of such common storage areas;
         I.   Proposed lot lines within the proposed PD district;
         J.   Proposed Buffers and their location, design and a maintenance
plan; and
         K.   Undeveloped areas.
      (7)   A table showing proposed acreage for each category of land use
within the proposed PD district.
      (8)   A table showing gross density and net residential, commercial,
office, and industrial acreage.
      (9)   A statement concerning proposed floor area ratios (percent of lot
in relation to building floor area) and the maximum building and impervious
surface coverage expressed as a percent of the front yard, rear yard, and total
site area for residential and nonresidential uses within the proposed PD
district.
      (10)   A proposed utility service plan pertaining to sanitary sewers,
storm drainage, potable water supply, street lighting, energy supply,
telecommunications and data transmission showing general locations of major
water and sewer lines, lift stations, and indicating whether gravity or forced
systems are planned as well as locations of other major utility
infrastructure.  Utility infrastructure shall be identified as either public or
private.
      (11)   A proposed sign plan identifying the location, size and type of
signs to be placed on the Planned Development.
      (12)   A description of each development stage of the proposed Planned
Development, if the proposed PD district  is to be developed in phases.
      (13)   A proposed construction/development schedule for the Planned
Development and each phase thereof.
      (14)   Proposed deed and easement documents for public infrastructure
within the PD district and proposed easement documents for proposed common
areas, ingress and egress rights-of-way for lots within the proposed PD
district and such other conveyance documents necessary to establish permanent
rights needed by owners and occupants of the proposed Planned Development.
      (15)   Proposed land covenants necessary to provide for permanent
protection of rights of land owners within the proposed PD district, to provide
for long term enforcement of conditions intended to protect the interests of
land owners in neighboring areas and to provide for permanent protection of
land features and characteristics of the proposed Planned Development.
      (16)   A draft proposed PD Ordinance in a format prescribed by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator and approved by the Law Director.
      (17)   Proposed financial assurances and security or other mechanisms
necessary to effectively ensure completion of public improvements, completion
of construction of Planned Development phases, long term maintenance of common
areas and other amenities in the proposed Planned Development, long term
maintenance and preservation of Planned Development features intended to
mitigate adverse effects on neighboring areas and areas within the proposed
Planned Development and preservation of the attributes of the proposed Planned
Development necessary to integration of the uses permitted therein accomplish
the purposes of this Chapter as pertaining to the proposed Planned Development.
 
   (d)   At any time during the application review process, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to supplement its application to provide such
additional data as the Planning Board may require to evaluate the character and
impact of the proposed PD district.
 
1140.06  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PD DISTRICT PRELIMINARY MASTER
DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A PD DISTRICT.
   (a)   The provisions of Chapter
1174 shall govern the establishment of a PD district under this Chapter;
provided, however:
      (1)   The plot plan and data pertaining to neighboring property required
in Subsections
1174.01(a)(1) and (2) may be provided separately along with an application
which may be made part of the Preliminary Master Development Plan.
      (2)   The requirement of Subsection
1174.01(b)(3) will be satisfied by compliance with the Preliminary Master
Development Plan requirement at Subsection
1140.05(c)(1).
 
   (b)   Preapplication Conference.  Prior to the submission of an application
for the establishment of a PD district, the applicant (along with such
consultants and professional advisors as the applicant chooses to attend) shall
meet with the Planning and Zoning Administrator (along with such other City
staff members which the Planning and Zoning Administrator deems appropriate)
for the purpose of assisting the applicant in submitting a complete and
compliant application for consideration by the Planning Board.  Upon receiving
a request for a preapplication conference from a prospective applicant, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall schedule a preapplication conference at
City Hall to be held within twenty five (25) days of the prospective
applicant's request for a preapplication conference.  The prospective applicant
may request, in writing, that the preapplication conference be scheduled for a
later date.  The applicant shall have prepared and shall have delivered to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator at least six (6) copies of the following data
at lease five (5) days prior to the scheduled preapplication conference date:
      (1)   A sketch plan of the proposed PD district;
      (2)   A statement of the total number of acres in the proposed PD
district;
      (3)   A statement of the number and type of structures and lots; the
number of acres to be occupied by each type of use in the proposed PD district;
      (4)   A statement explaining the objectives of the proposed Planned
Development and the uses to be included within the proposed PD district;
      (5)   The known deviations from subdivision regulations to be sought; the
known plans for private utilities, amenities, and/or roadways.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may, at the applicant's option,
submit a complete draft PD district application in lieu of the above mentioned
five items.
 
   (c)   In the event the applicant fails to submit the above mentioned data to
the Planning and Zoning Administrator at least five (5) days prior to the
scheduled preapplication conference, the Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall reschedule a preapplication conference for a date after the above
mentioned data has been delivered to the Planning and Zoning Administrator, but
no later than thirty (30) days after the above mentioned data has been
delivered to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
 
   (d)   After the initial preapplication conference, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator may schedule such additional preapplication conferences as the
Planning and Zoning Administrator finds to be necessary to enable the applicant
to submit a complete and compliant application for consideration by the
Planning Board.
 
   (e)   When an application to establish a PD district is in good order,
complete and compliant with the requirements of Section
1140.05, it shall be submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to Section
1174.02 of the Springfield Zoning Code.  A applicant may waive, in writing, the
45 day deadline for consideration of a zoning amendment petition by the
Planning Board.
 
   (f)   After the Planning Board's due consideration of an application for
establishment of a PD district, the Planning Board shall prepare and submit to
the City Commission a written report of its findings which form the basis of
the Planning Board's recommendation and shall make its recommendation on such
application to the City Commission by:
      (1)   Recommending adoption of the PD district to which the applicant has
consented, in writing as required in this Chapter, and tendering to the City
Commission a PD Ordinance to establish the PD district; or
      (2)   Forwarding to the City Commission a PD Ordinance to establish the
PD district to which the applicant has consented, in writing as required in
this Chapter, but recommending that the PD district proposed in the forwarded
PD Ordinance not be established.
 
   (g)   In the event the City Commission considers a PD Ordinance which is
materially different from the PD Ordinance recommended by the Planning Board,
the applicant must consent, in writing, to such modified PD Ordinance (as
required in this Chapter) and the considered PD Ordinance shall be adopted only
by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the City Commission.
 
1140.07  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PD ORDINANCE.
   (a)   After adoption of a PD Ordinance by the City Commission, the owners of
lands within the PD district shall record with the Clark County, Ohio County
Recorder an affidavit notifying the public that the lands described in the PD
Ordinance have been made subject to the PD Ordinance.  The affidavit shall be
in a form approved by the Law Director.
 
   (b)   After adoption of a PD Ordinance by the City Commission, the owners of
lands within the PD district shall also record with the Clark County, Ohio
County Recorder such other deeds, easements declarations of land covenants and
such other conveyances of interests in real property as the PD Ordinance
requires.
 
   (c)    After adoption of a PD Ordinance by the City Commission, the
applicant shall forthwith deliver to the City proof acceptable to the City
Manager and Law Director that such financial assurances, security and other
mechanisms as are required under the PD Ordinance are in place, properly funded
and enforceable.
 
   (d)   No building permit shall be issued for any construction within a PD
district until after the applicant has achieved full and complete compliance
with the requirements of subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of this Section, as
specified in the PD Ordinance.
 
   (e)   In the event that a Planned Development or a phase of a Planned
Development is not under substantial construction within twenty four (24)
months after  the commencement date for the relevant portion of the Planned
Development, as specified in the Development Schedule adopted in the PD
Ordinance; then, upon a determination by the City Commission that the PD
Ordinance should not be amended to allow an extension of time to commence
substantial construction of the relevant portion of the Planned Development,
the Planning Board shall proceed to consider whether such lands included in the
said portion of the Planned Development should be rezoned and shall make its
recommendation to the City Commission.
 
1140.08  ADMINISTRATION OF THE PD ORDINANCE.
   (a)   The Planning Board shall administer each PD Ordinance in accordance
with the standards for such administration established in the PD Ordinance and
shall administer such PD Ordinance in a manner consistent with accomplishing
the purposes of this Chapter set forth in Section
1140.01.  Administration of a PD Ordinance may include modification of the
Master Development Plan; provided such modification is in compliance with the
standards for administration established in the PD Ordinance and is consistent
with accomplishing the purposes of this Chapter set forth in Section
1140.01.
      (1)   Property owners seeking a modification of the Master Development
Plan governing their land may file a written request for modification with the
Planning Board describing the modification requested and providing all data
needed by the Planning Board to determine whether such requested modification
can be approved under the standards established in the PD Ordinance governing
such land.
      (2)   The Planning Board shall consider a request for modification only
when all owners of freehold estates in the subject land have joined in making
the request.
      (3)   The Planning Board may require that a request be supplemented with
such additional data as the Planning Board determines is necessary to determine
whether a requested modification should be granted.
      (4)   The Planning board shall grant the requested modification if the
Planning Board is able to find that the requested modification is in compliance
with the standards for administration established in the PD Ordinance and is
consistent with accomplishing the purposes of this Chapter set forth in Section
1140.01.
 
   (b)   In the event that all or a portion of a Planned Development is
rezoned, as provided for in Section
1140.07(e) or otherwise, the Planning Board shall direct the Planning and
Zoning Administrator to submit an affidavit to the Clark County, Ohio County
Recorder giving notice to the public that the relevant portion of the Planned
Development is no longer subject to the PD Ordinance.  The affidavit shall be
in a form approved by the Law Director.
 
   (c)   Notwithstanding the terms of subdivision 1140.08(a), above, the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall perform the functions delegated to it under Chapter
1172 in matters pertaining to a PD district.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1141
UPOD Unified Plan Overlay District
 
1141.01   Purpose.
1141.02   General requirements.
 
1141.01  PURPOSE.
   (a)   This chapter is intended to implement the Unified Plan for Downtown
Springfield adopted by the Springfield City Commission in Resolution No. 5509,
adopted May 15, 2007.  The Unified Plan for Downtown Springfield adopts a
uniform development standard approach to land use and zoning regulation. 
Uniform development standard land use regulations allow market demands to
determine the mix of uses within the constraints of the building design
standards of the community. The Unified Plan establishes zones of building type
and allows building owners to determine the uses.
 
   (b)   This chapter includes both required and recommend unified development
standards.  All required zoning regulations must be complied with.  Landowners
are specifically encouraged to comply with recommended district uses, design
standards, and economic development objectives.
 
   (c)   The policy objectives intended to be achieved by the imposition of the
UPOD Urban Commercial Overlay District are to:
      (1)   Unite all downtown developments into a single plan
      (2)   Create a unified development standard for downtown
      (3)   Protect the character of existing downtown residential
neighborhoods
      (4)   Provide guidance to the private market
      (5)   Establish shared goals for future zoning downtown
      (6)   Achieve unified and valuable design that is feasible and flexible
for developers
      (7)   Achieve unified and valuable development downtown that is feasible
and flexible for the City of Springfield over time
      (8)   Assist in future transportation, corridor planning, and
transportation demand management downtown
      (9)   Promote pedestrian activity downtown
      (10)   Create incentives for downtown development
      (11)   Motivate a vibrant and diverse downtown economy
      (12)   Encourage the construction of a vibrant and diverse downtown
activity center
      (13)   Inspire the community to protect historically significant
structures and reuse existing structures
 
   (d)   This chapter is intended to further and protect the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the
Springfield community.  This chapter is further intended to enhance and protect
property values in downtown Springfield and prevent impairment and destruction
of property values.
(Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1141.02  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All UPOD Unified Plan Overly District new construction shall meet the
following required design and development criteria for the land use district in
which it is located and all new construction is encouraged to conform to the
following recommended design and development criteria for the land use district
in which it is located:
   (a)   Downtown Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 5 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 10
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[thirty (30) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of thirty (30) feet.
            v.   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements, such as, but not limited to, windows and columns, into their
façade design (See Graphic: Vertical Element).
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening (See Graphic: Urban
Screening). Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10
percent opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10
feet. The materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Off-Street Parking is not required for individual uses.
         C.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30 percent highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass.
Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
            v.   Exterior lighting.
            vi.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Mixed use of consumer, restaurant, and service
retail, office, institutional, medical, recreational, and residential
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Transparent, or even open, first floor encouraged.
            ii.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            iii.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding (See Graphic: Roofline).
            iv.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
            v.   Outdoor seating is recommended for food service uses.
            vi.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            vii.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            viii.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de
minimis impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way
clearance of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department
according
902.01(c)]. 
         C.   Exterior Lighting:
            i.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets is
recommended.
            ii.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be
architecturally integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            iii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
            iv.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            ii.   Externally illuminated emblem signs should be used.
            iii.   Projecting signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Internally illuminated signs are discouraged.
   (b)   Retail Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 5 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 10
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3-9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[thirty (30) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of thirty (30) feet.
            v.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are required for retail, services, and food uses as protection to pedestrians.
            vi.   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements, such as, but not limited to, windows and columns, into their
façade design (See Graphic: Vertical Element).
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening (See Graphic: Urban
Screening). Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10%
opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet. The
materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements
of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Off-Street Parking is not required for individual uses.
         E.   Outdoor Seating:
            i.   Outdoor seating is required for food service uses.
            ii.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            iii.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            iv.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de minimis
impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way clearance
of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department according
902.01(c)]. 
         F.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30 percent highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass.
Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
         G.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
            ii.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights shall be used.
            iii.   Down lighting shall be used every 50 foot to reinforce
circulation corridors.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Consumer, restaurant, and service retail
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Transparent, or even open, first floor encouraged.
            ii.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding (See Graphic: Roofline).
            iii.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be architecturally
integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Projecting signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Externally illuminated emblem signs are encouraged.
            v.   Internally illuminated are permitted.
   (c)   Open Space
      (1)   Required
         A.   Allowable Uses
            i.   Green Space
            ii.   Public Art
            iii.   Public Recreation
            iv.   Temporary structures with conditional use permit
   (d)   Residential Zoning OVERLAY: Design and Development Standards
      (1)   Required
         A.   See RS-8 (Chapter
1108)
   (e)   Office Mixed use Zoning UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 5 feet
            (i)   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 10
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency) .
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[thirty (30) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of thirty (30) feet (See Graphic: Window
Glass and Transparency).
            v.   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements, such as, but not limited to, windows and columns, into their
façade design (See Graphic: Vertical Element).
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening (See Graphic: Urban
Screening). Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10%
opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet. The
materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements
of Subsections
1156.01 and
1161.02(h). 
            ii.   Off-Street Parking is not required for individual uses.
         E.   Outdoor Seating:
            i.   Outdoor seating is required for food service uses.
            ii.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            iii.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            iv.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de minimis
impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way clearance
of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department according
902.01(c)]. 
         F.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30% highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass. Highly
tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly reflective
finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
         G.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
            ii.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights shall be used.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Office, institutional, medical and employment
activity center mixed uses to include consumer, restaurant, and service retail
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Transparent, or even open, first floor encouraged.
            ii.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            iii.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding (See Graphic: Roofline).
            iv.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be architecturally
integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            ii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Externally illuminated emblem signs should be used.
            iv.   Projecting signs are encouraged.
            v.   Internally illuminated signs are discouraged.
   (f)   Arts And Cultural Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 10 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 10
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open.
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[thirty (30) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of thirty (30) feet.
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening (See Graphic: Urban
Screening). Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10
percent opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10
feet. The materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Off-Street Parking is not required for individual uses.
         E.   Outdoor Seating:
            i.   Outdoor seating is required for food service uses as a primary
use.
            ii.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            iii.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            iv.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de minimis
impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way clearance
of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department according
902.01(c)]. 
            v.   Residential uses shall include outdoor balconies.
            vi.   Exterior Materials:
            vii.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            viii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be
more than 30 percent highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored
glass. Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            ix.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            x.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
         F.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
            ii.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights shall be used.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Mixed use of cultural, recreational, consumer,
restaurant, and service retail, institutional, and residential
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Transparent, or even open, first floor encouraged.
            ii.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            iii.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding (See Graphic: Roofline). The materials for
screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h). 
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be architecturally
integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            ii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Externally illuminated emblem signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Internally illuminated signs are discouraged.
   (g)   Transitional Downtown Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 10 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 3
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open.
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[twenty (20) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of twenty (20) feet. Structures more than
fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate vertical elements, such as, but not
limited to, windows and columns, into their façade design (See Graphic:
Vertical Element).
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening or if 1/4 mile from core
block evergreen is screening permitted (See Graphic: Urban Screening). Urban
screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material and iron or
similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10 percent
opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet. The
materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements
of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Shared parking must be used wherever possible.
            iii.   No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses
unless such uses exceed [3,000] square feet of gross floor area, in which case
off-street parking must be provided for the floor area in excess of [3,000]
square feet.
         E.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30 percent highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass.
Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
         F.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
            ii.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights shall be used.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Mixed use of consumer, restaurant, and service
retail, office, institutional, medical, recreational, and residential
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            ii.   Outdoor seating is encouraged for food service uses.
            iii.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            iv.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            v.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de minimis
impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way clearance
of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department according
902.01(c)]. 
            vi.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be architecturally
integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            ii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Projecting signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Externally illuminated emblem signs are encouraged.
            v.   Internally illuminated signs are discouraged.
   (h)   Transitional Retail Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 10 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 3
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[twenty (20) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of twenty (20) feet.
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening or if 1/4 mile from core
block evergreen is screening permitted (See Graphic: Urban Screening). Urban
screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material and iron or
similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10% opacity by
including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet. The materials for
screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Shared parking must be used wherever possible.
            iii.   No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses
unless such uses exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, in which case
off-street parking must be provided for the floor area in excess of 3,000
square feet.
         E.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30% highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass. Highly
tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly reflective
finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
         F.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Consumer, restaurant, and service retail
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open.
            ii.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            iii.   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements, such as, but not limited to, windows and columns, into their
façade design (See Graphic: Vertical Element).
            iv.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding (See Graphic: Roofline).
            v.   Outdoor seating is encouraged for food service uses.
            vi.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            vii.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            viii.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de
minimis impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way
clearance of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department
according
902.01(c)]. 
            ix.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights should be used.
            ii.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be
architecturally integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            iii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Projecting signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Externally illuminated emblem signs are encouraged.
            v.   Internally illuminated signs are allowed
   (i)   Transitional Office Mixed Use UPOD District
      (1)   Required
         A.   Maximum Setback: 10 feet
            i.   Setback applies to all wall surfaces. Buildings can have
varying "setbacks" that form entrances, atriums, urban parks, express
structural elements, create special exhibit areas, planters, etc.
         B.   Floor Area Ratio: 3
         C.   Building Standards:
            i.   Building facades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            ii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 to 9 feet (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency).
            iii.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open (See Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency) .
            iv.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
[twenty (20) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building
does not actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of twenty (20) feet.
         D.   Parking:
            i.   Parking must be provided in rear of building. In locations
where a "rear" yard fronts a street or is visible within 150 feet of a street,
all parking must be screened using urban screening or if 1/4 mile from core
block evergreen is screening permitted (See Graphic: Urban Screening). Urban
screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material and iron or
similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10 percent
opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet. The
materials for screening and their placement shall comply with the requirements
of Subsection
1156.01 and
1161.02(h).
            ii.   Shared parking must be used wherever possible.
            iii.   No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses
unless such uses exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, in which case
off-street parking must be provided for the floor area in excess of 3,000
square feet.
         E.   Exterior Materials:
            i.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone and
plaster/stucco.
            ii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs shall not be more
than 30 percent highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass.
Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            iii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials that they are not.
            iv.   Prohibited exterior materials for all nonresidential uses
include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a finish material,
shall be prohibited on visible elevations. Visible elevations are those
elevation visual from a public street or parking area.
            v.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings.
            vi.   Ornamental or decorative lights mounted with brackets and
emblem sign lights shall be used.
      (2)   Recommended
         A.   Recommended Uses: Office, institutional, and medical
         B.   Building Standards:
            i.   Transparent, or even open, first floor encouraged.
            ii.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            iii.   Structures more than fifty (50) feet wide shall incorporate
vertical elements, such as, but not limited to, windows and columns, into their
façade design (See Graphic: Vertical Element).
            iv.   Outdoor seating is encouraged for food service uses.
            v.   Outdoor seating must be of metal, natural stone, or brick
material.
            vi.   If the outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground
or to a building, the outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
            vii.   Outdoor seating placed in the right-of-way must of de
minimis impact, and be placed so as allow a minimum unobstructed right-of-way
clearance of 4 feet [requires approval of Community Development Department
according
902.01(c)]. 
            viii.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
         C.   Exterior lighting:
            i.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be architecturally
integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            ii.   Down lighting should be used to reinforce circulation
corridors.
         D.   Signage:
            i.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged to serve as backdrops for signage, graphics or other features
that would change with time.
            ii.   Signs should fit the character of downtown but also encourage
creativity.
            iii.   Externally illuminated emblem signs are encouraged.
            iv.   Internally illuminated signs are discouraged.
               (Ord. 07-130. Passed 5-15-07; Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3707.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3710.jpg]
Graphic: Vertical Element                 Graphic: Roofline
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3713.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3716.jpg]
Graphic: Urban Screening                  Graphic: Urban Screening
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3719.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3722.jpg]
Graphic: Urban Screening                  Graphic: Urban Screening
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3725.jpg]
Graphic: Window Glass and Transparency
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1142
EECPOD Eastern Edge Corridor Plan Overlay District
 
1142.01   Purpose and application.
1142.02   Definitions.
1142.03   General Requirements.
1142.04   Tables and Graphics.
Maps
 
1142.01  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   (a)   This chapter is intended to implement the Eastern Edge Corridor Plan
for East National Road adopted by the Springfield City Commission in Resolution
143-08.  The Eastern Edge Corridor Plan creates a cohesive and
interjurisdictional comprehensive land use plan for the East National Road
Corridor that aims to grow contextually and geographically advantageous
development, respect the history and character of the area, provide best
management for transportation safety and demand by maintaining independent,
through interlocking development segments from the corridor's urban core to the
rural edge. The Eastern Edge Corridor Plan recommends a uniform development
standard approach to land use and zoning regulation. Land uses are guided by a
future land use map and physical site and building layout is determined by
transect-based zoning standards. The Plan requires that all new large-scale
developments along the Eastern Edge Corridor be zoned and planned as planned
developments. Small-scale developments in the Corridor Plan area may be
developed according to the standardized zoning.
 
   (b)   This chapter includes both required and recommended development
standards.  All required zoning regulations shall be complied with.  Landowners
are specifically encouraged to comply with recommended district uses, design
standards, and economic development objectives. Provisions of this are
activated by "shall" when required; "should" when recommended; and "may" when
optional. Section
1142.02 contains regulatory language that is integral to this Code. Those terms
not defined in section
1142.02 shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. Where in conflict,
numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics.
 
   (c)   The policy objectives intended to be achieved by the imposition of the
Eastern Edge Overlay District are to:
      (1)   Provide a tool to encourage and restrict development in a manner
that is consistent with Future Land Use, Corridor Plan Goals, and
infrastructure capacity
      (2)       Be general enough to allow some flexibility, but strong enough
to influence development patterns
      (3)   Maintain independent, interdependent, interlocking development
segments from the corridor's urban core to the rural edge
      (4)   Consider all affected jurisdictions' needs and visions
      (5)   Guide and encourage contextually and geographically advantageous
new development by creating intended growth sectors and providing guidance for
development in each sector
      (6)   Encourage and support successful development types in districts
with business expansion and retention
      (7)   Respect the areas' historic and natural character
      (8)   Provide best management for transportation safety and demand
      (9)   Develop incentives for the reuse or redevelopment of properties
      (10)   Conform physical design proposals to community goals and social
and economic policies
 
   (d)   GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE: The Geographic Scope of this Chapter is the East
National Road Corridor from Spring Street in Springfield to Titus Road in
Springfield Township. This Overlay divides the East National Road Corridor into
four unique transect zones as outlined in Table 1: Transect Zone Geographic
Description.
 
   (e)   This chapter is intended to further and protect the public health,
safety, moral, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the
Springfield community.  This chapter is further intended to enhance and protect
property values in downtown Springfield and prevent impairment and destruction
of property values.
 
1142.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions are applied
herein.
   (a)   (1)    Avenue (AV): a thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low
to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers,
and usually equipped with a landscaped median.
   (b)   (1)    Bicycle Lane (BL): a dedicated lane for cycling within a
moderate-speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping.
      (2)   Bicycle Route (BR): a thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of
bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds.
      (3)    Bicycle Trail (BT): a bicycle way running independently of a
vehicular thoroughfare.
      (4)   Bioswale: an extended rain garden that may run the length of the
block.
      (5)   Block Face: the aggregate of all the building façades on one side
of a block.
      (6)   Boulevard (BV): a thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity
and moderate speed, traversing an urbanized area. Boulevards are usually
equipped with slip roads buffering sidewalks and buildings.
      (7)   Buffer: Areas between parcels, lots, or different zoning districts
set aside to mitigate visual, light or noise nuisances. May be an earthen berm
or any natural material like trees or shrubs or otherwise mandated by this
document or the various jurisdictions.
      (8)   Building Line: A line defining the minimum front, side, and rear
yard requirement.
      (9)   Bus Rapid Transit: A rubber tire system with its own right-of-way
or dedicated lane along at least 70% of its route providing transit service
that is faster than a regular bus.
   (c)   (1)   Civic: The term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated
to art, culture, education, recreation, Government, transit, or municipal
parking.
      (2)   Civic Building: A building operated by not-for-profit organizations
dedicated to art, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, or
municipal parking.
      (3)   Civic Parking Reserve: Parking structure or parking lot within a
quarter-mile of the site that it serves.
      (4)   Civic Space: An outdoor area dedicated for public use.
      (5)   Civic Zone: Designation for public sites dedicated for civic
buildings and civic space.
      (6)   Common Yard: A planted private frontage wherein the façade is set
back from the frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards.
      (7)   Configuration: The form of a building based on its massing, private
frontage, and height.
      (8)   Corridor: A lineal geographic system incorporating transportation
and/or greenway trajectories.
      (9)   Covenant: A legally binding written promise or pledge.
      (10)   Cross Access: A service drive providing vehicular access between
two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street
system.
   (d)   (1)   Deed Restriction: A legal restriction on the use of land
contained in the deed to the property.
      (2)   Density: The number of dwelling units within a standard measure of
land area.
      (3)   Density, Gross:  The number of dwelling units per acre of the total
land to be developed, including public ways and open space.
      (4)   Density, Net:  The number of dwelling units per acre of land when
the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses.
      (5)   Development Standards:  Standards controlling the size of
structures and the relationships of structures and uses to each other and to
open spaces and lot lines.  Development standards include but are not limited
to regulations controlling maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot
frontage, minimum size of yards and setbacks, maximum lot coverage, and maximum
density.
      (6)   Disposition: The placement of a building on its lot.
   (e)   (1)   Earth Berm:  A low, usually linear mound of earth covered with
grass or other landscape materials used to define, screen, protect, and/or
enhance the appearance of a particular space or area of land.
      (2)   Effective Parking: The amount of parking required for Mixed Use
after adjustment by the shared parking factor.
      (3)   Elevation: An exterior wall of a building not along a frontage
line.
   (f)   (1)    Final Plan: A completed and full set of plans, drawings, data,
and any and all other materials needed to evaluate and review a subdivision's
conformance with local subdivision regulations and which follow the approved
preliminary plan as well as conformance with other applicable regulations. 
      (2)   Frontage Road: A public or private drive, which generally parallels
a public street between the right-of-way and the front setback line. The
frontage road provides access to private properties while separating them from
the arterial street (see also Service Roads).
   (g)   (1)   Green: A civic space type for unstructured recreation spatially
defined by landscaping rather than building frontages.
      (2)   Green Roof: A roof partially or completely covered with vegetation
and soil, or a growing medium planted over a waterproofing membrane. (Syn: eco-
roof, living roof).
      (3)   Greenway: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions,
which may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
   (h)   (1)   Highway: A rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular
speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural transect zones (T-
1, T-2, and T-3).
      (2)   Highway, Limited Access: A public freeway or expressway designed
for through traffic and to which abutting properties have no legal right to
direct access.
      (3)   Homeowner's Association: A private association, partnership, LLC,
or any legal entity of homeowners established by a developer with local
government approval, whose purpose it is to own, operate, and maintain various
common properties, including but not limited to open space, private streets,
and recreation facilities. 
   (i)   (1)   Infill: New development on land that had been previously
developed.
   (j)   (1)   Joint Access (or Shared Access): A driveway connecting two or
more contiguous sites to the public street system.
   (l)   (1)   Landscaping:  Landscaping shall consist of any of the following
or combination thereof:  materials such as but not limited to grass, hardy
ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, and trees; and non-living durable
material commonly utilized in landscaping, such as but not limited to rocks,
pebbles, sand, walls, and fences, but not including paving as a principal
design element.
      (2)   Large-scare development: A development composed of more than 10
acres of gross project site plan land area.
      (3)   Layer: A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are
permitted.
      (4)   Lot cluster: Any single lot or a group of adjacent lots having a
single uninterrupted project site plan perimeter boundary enclosing all of the
lots.
      (5)   Lot Coverage: A measure of intensity of land use that represents
the portion of a site that is impervious (i.e., does not absorb water). This
portion includes but is not limited to all areas covered by buildings, parking
structures, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any paved areas.
   (m)   (1)   Main Civic Space: The primary outdoor gathering place for a
community. The Main Civic Space is often, but not always associated with an
important civic building.
      (2)   Mixed Use: Multiple functions within the same building through
superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a
specified proximity.
      (3)   Multi Modal Transportation: Transportation, which includes at least
two modes of transport, such as shipping by rail and by sea.
   (n)   (1)   Net  Acreage  (Aka  Net  Lot  Area): Net acreage is contiguous
lot area which does not include:  area in the existing or proposed public or
private right-of-way, any area unacceptable for septic system installation, any
area within a retention/detention basin, any area contained within a permanent
body of water, or any area within an existing or proposed easement except those
easement areas parallel and within ten (10) feet of the lot lines.
   (p)   (1)   Park: A civic space type that is a natural preserve available
for unstructured recreation.
      (2)     Pedestrian-orientated space or feature: An area adjacent to a
connecting building or walkway developed to provide continuous safety,
interest, and comfort for people walking or sitting. This may include site
design features such as a bench, light pole, trash can, and/or landscape areas
on one or both sides.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkway: Clearly defined, visible and/or identifiable
pedestrian connections provided between parking lots, street sidewalks, open
spaces, community facilities and buildings.
         Pedestrian walkways shall be:
         a.   Clearly defined, visible and identifiable
         b.   Minimum width of a hard surfaced walkway shall be at least five
feet.
      (4)   Preliminary Plan: A Preliminary Master Development Plan as defined
in Chapter
1140.
      (5)   Planned Development (PD):  An area zoned under Chapter
1140. 
      (6)   Planter: The element of the public frontage, which accommodates
street trees or other plants whether continuous or individual.
      (7)   Plaza: A civic space paved and spatially defined by building
frontages.
      (8)   Project site plan:  A plan showing uses and structures proposed for
a parcel of land.
      (9)   Project site plan land area: Any quantity of land capable of being
described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be
established and which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be
used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit.
   (r)   (1)   Rain Garden: Sunken garden using native or a combination of
plants.
          (2)   Record Plan: A drawing or set of drawings of an approved final
subdivision prepared for appropriate signatures and recording in the County
Recorder's office and for distribution to applicable agencies. 
      (3)   Rear Alley (RA): A vehicular way located to the rear of lots
providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and/or containing
utility easements. Rear alleys are paved from building face to building face,
with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges.
      (4)   Rear Lane (RL): A vehicular way located to the rear of lots
providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and/or containing
utility easements. Rear lanes are paved lightly to driveway standards and have
a streetscape which consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised curb,
and is drained by percolation.
      (5)   Road (RD): A local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low-to-
moderate vehicular speed and capacity.
         This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Zones (T1-T3).
   (s)   (1)   Scenic: An area presenting a view of natural and man-made
elements of the visual environment with the characteristics of offering
strikingly distinct and a pleasing and memorable visual experience.
      (2)   Service Road: A public or private street or road, auxiliary to a
main thoroughfare that maintains local road  continuity and provides access to
parcels adjacent to the limited access highway.
      (3)   Shared Parking Factor: An accounting for parking spaces that are
available to more than one function.
      (4)   Small-scale development: A development composed of 10 acres or less
of gross project site plan land area.
      (5)   Square: A civic space designed for unstructured recreation and
civic purposes spatially defined by building frontages and consisting of
pedestrian walkways, lawns and trees.
      (6)   Story: A habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or
raised basement.
      (7)   Streetscape: The appearance or view of a street.
      (8)   Street screen: A freestanding wall or organic screen built along
the frontage line, or coplanar with the façade.
   (t)   (1)   T-Zone: Transect Zone.
      (2)   Thoroughfare: A way consisting of vehicular lanes for use by
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces.
      (3)   Traffic Calming: The combination of physical measures that reduce
the negative effects of motor vehicle use, alter driver behavior and improve
conditions for non-motorized street users.
      (4)   Transect: An area containing a range of different development
types. Transects define the physical form and character of a place, according
to the density and intensity of its land use and urbanism.
   (v)   (1)   Vernacular: Architecture that draws more on traditional forms
and func-tionalism, rather than on design principles or ornamentation of high-
style architecture. Vernacular style features are defined in this Chapter as
follows (see terminology graphics 8 through 11) :
         A.   RICHARDSONIAN ROMANESQUE: A building of Romanesque style is a
masonry structure, typically with rough-cut stonework.
            i.   Distinguishing characteristics include:
               a.   Required
                  1.   Polychromatic (exhibit a variety of colors) through the
use of contrasting colors of stone
                  2.   Rough-cut stone or brick walls
               b.   Recommended
                  1.   Hipped Roof
                  2.   Roof with cross gables
                  3.   Tower - rounded with cone-shaped roofs
                  4.   Wide rounded arches - low, broad "Roman" arches over
arcades and doorways
                  5.   Recessed windows - patterned masonry arches over windows
                  6.   Columns and pilasters with spirals and leaf designs
                  7.   Stone banding
         B.   TUDOR REVIVAL: A building of Tudor Revival style is easily
identified by its characteristic half-timbering, a decorative treatment that
appears to expose structural elements.
            i.   Distinguishing characteristics include:
               a.   Required
                  1.   Half-timbering - the spaces between the timbers are
nogged (filled in) with stone or brick and usually stuccoed, but sometimes left
exposed
                  2.   Exterior must be a combination of brick, rubble stone,
and half-timbering
               b.   Recommended
                  1.   Steeply pitched roofs with intersecting gables
                  2.   Dormer windows
                  3.   Roof with cross gables
                  4.   Casement windows (hinged at the sides to open outward)
                  5.   Double hung windows are multi-paned
                  6.   Slate or terra cotta tile roofs
                  7.   Massive, decorative brick chimneys
         C.   NEOCLASSICAL REVIVAL: Neoclassical Revival style is a bold,
monumental style that relies on classical design elements.
            i.   Distinguishing characteristics include:
               a.   Required
                  1.   Use of columns, pilasters, pediments and cornices
                  2.   Constructed of all masonry
               b.   Recommended
                  1.   Cornice with dentils
                  2.   A pediment
                  3.   A portico with colossal Corinthian topped columns
                  4.   Palladian-style windows
                  5.   Keystones at the top of the arches
                  6.   Balustrade on the roof
                  7.   Brackets and fanlight over the main front door
         D.   RENAISSANCE REVIVAL:
            i.   Distinguishing characteristics include:
               a.   Required
                  1.   Smooth stone cube-like fronts 
                  2.   Doors are centrally located and symmetry predominates
                  3.   Constructed of all masonry
               b.   Recommended
                  1.   Low-pitched hip roofs are sometimes accented with
balustrades (railings) above full entablatures (decorative horizontal bands) at
the roofline
                  2.   Carved stone window trim often varies in design from
floor to floor
                  3.   Quoins (vertical rows of brick or stone defining the
corners of buildings) and horizontal banding between floors
                  4.   Arched openings supported by columns
                  5.   Full entablatures between floors
                  6.   Balconies
                  7.   First floors of rusticated stone (stone with beveled
edges, causing joints between stones to be deeply recessed)
 
1142.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Overall Corridor
      (1)   Land Use Regulations
         A.   Purpose and Intent: The following future land uses are
established to encourage and restrict development in a manner that is
consistent with long term development goals. The land use districts are to
encourage compatible development that should produce infill and redevelopment
in urban areas and retain natural infrastructure and visual character in rural
areas.
         B.   Uses in large-scale developments should conform to the property's
designated future land use as set forth in this chapter.
         C.   Uses in small-scale developments shall comply with the uses
specified in the zoning district in which they are located and should conform
to the property's designated future land use as set forth in this chapter.
         D.   Overall corridor requirements are applicable to all transects.
      (2)   Land Use Districts
         A.   (AOS) Agriculture and Open Space: The Agriculture and Open Space
District shall consist of open space that is best suited for agricultural uses
or is not suitable for development.
         B.   (MUCE) Mixed Use Conservation Edge District: This district is
designated for a mix of small-scale commercial development, residential
development, and open space. The district is intended to provide a development
pattern that will be a transitional area from commercial to agricultural and
rural residential areas. The mix of uses should include 30% contiguous open
space, 30% residential, and 40% small-scale commercial. New large scale planned
developments in this district shall conform to table 2, in addition to tables
3-12. New developments shall incorporate stucco, stone, and brick exterior
materials and should have architectural characteristics consistent with and
complimentary to historic regional commercial and office development. Each
development shall employ required vernacular characteristics and a minimum of
two recommended characteristics for a single vernacular style type, per Section
1142.02  (v)(1) of the definitions.  New development shall provide a buffer
from adjoining residential development.
         C.   (MURD) Mixed Use Research and Development: This district provides
for a mix of research, product development, light production and assembly,
education, hotel/conference center, subordinate small-scale commercial, and
open space uses. The district is intended to provide an employment center
development pattern that will be a transitional area from commercial to
agricultural and rural residential areas. The mix of uses should include 40%
contiguous open space and 60% developable project area. Contiguous open space
shall extend along the entire frontage of US-40. New development shall provide
a buffer from adjoining residential development. New large scale planned
developments in this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables
3-12.
         D.   (HRRC) Highway Rural Retail Conservation Edge: This district
provides for a mix of highway oriented commercial, general retail, and open
space. Contiguous open space shall extend along the entire frontage of US-40.
The mix of uses should include 30% contiguous open space and 70% highway
oriented commercial and general retail. New development shall provide a buffer
from adjoining residential and agricultural development. New large scale
planned developments in this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to
Tables 3-12.
         E.   (CTC) Commercial Town Center District: This district provides for
consumer commercial and shall provide a buffer from adjoining residential
development. Developments shall be pedestrian-oriented cluster developments
with buildings extending along the entire frontage of US-40 and rear-yard
parking hidden from the corridor view. New developments shall have
architectural characteristics consistent with and complimentary to historic
regional commercial and office development that incorporates stucco, stone, and
brick exterior materials. Each development shall employ required vernacular
characteristics and a minimum of two recommended characteristics for a single
vernacular style type, per Section
1142.02 (v) (1) of the definitions.  New large scale planned developments in
this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
         F.   (MUCD) Mixed Use Center District: This district provides a
transition between consumer-oriented commercial development and residential
development. This district provides for small-scale low-traffic commercial,
professional office, and residential uses. Users are encouraged to adaptively
reuse existing structures, although some new development may be permitted. New
developments will follow a dense, infill development pattern. Sites are served
by limited rear-yarded parking and accessed by rear yard shared drives with
adjoining properties. New large scale planned developments in this district
shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
         G.   (UCC) Urban Commercial Center District: This district provides
for traditional small-scale consumer-oriented commercial development. New
developments should follow a dense, infill development pattern. Sites are
served limited rear-yard parking and accessed by rear yard shared drives with
adjoining properties. New large scale planned developments in this district
shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
         H.   (MSMC) Main Street Mixed Core District: This district provides
for a mix of small and medium-scale commercial, recreational/entertainment,
office, and residential uses. Primarily, development should be consistent with
historic use, building type, and exterior of the architecture, character, and
cultural heritage of the district from the historic period of 1880 to 1950.
Secondarily, if the proposed new development is not consistent with historic
use of the historic period of 1880 to 1950, the building type and exterior of
the development should be consistent with the architecture, character, and
cultural heritage of the district from the historic period of 1880 to 1950.
Each development shall employ required vernacular characteristics and a minimum
of two recommended characteristics for a single vernacular style type, per
Section
1142.02  (v)(1) of the definitions.  New development shall provide a buffer
from adjoining residential development.  High-density infill development is
preferred in this district with limited parking to be located in the rear and
accessed from rear yards. Pedestrian-oriented access is preferred and shared
parking should be arranged where possible. New large scale planned developments
in this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
         I.   (PAMC) Premier Auto Market Core District: This district provides
for high-intensity and high-density automobile-oriented developments.
Developments should maintain a showcase exterior and be consistent with similar
surrounding automobile oriented uses in height and design. New large scale
planned developments in this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to
Tables 3-12.
         J.   Residential Low Density: This district is to provide for single-
family residential development. The recommended density is 1- 0.2 units to the
acre. 
         K.   Residential Medium Low Density: This district provides for
single-family residential development consistent with the single-family
residential character of low-density residential development in the county and
township. The recommended density is 1 - 2 units to the acre.  New large scale
planned developments in this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to
Tables 3-12.
         L.   Residential Medium High Density: This district provides for the
development of small lot single-family dwellings.  The recommended density is 2
- 8 units to the acre. New large scale planned developments in this district
shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
         M.   Residential High Density: The purpose of this district is to
provide for the development of multi-family uses. The recommended density is 8
up to a maximum 44 units to the acre. New large scale planned developments in
this district shall conform to Table 2, in addition to Tables 3-12.
      (3)   Large-scale Development Standards
         A.   Planned Development Process
            i.   All new large-scale developments in the Eastern Edge Corridor
District shall be zoned and planned as a planned development according to
Chapter
1140 of the Codified Ordinances.
            ii.   All large-scale developments shall comply with Table 2: Land
Use Land Density and Composition Standards, planned development requirements
set forth in each transect, and with
1142.03 (a) (3) A. Each individual lot in large scale developments shall also
comply with all relevant requirements set forth in the Overall Corridor Small-
scale development standards subsection
1142.03 (a) (4) (A), and the transect specific Small-scale development
standards
1142.03 (b) - (e).
            iii.   Planned Developments shall comply with all requirements of
Chapter
1140, and also include a development plan that demonstrates compliance with
Tables 1-12. The development plan shall consist of one or more maps and
regulating documents showing the following for each in the plan area, in
compliance with the standards described in this Code:
               a.   Use Zones
               b.   Civic Zones
               c.   Thoroughfare Network
               d.   Site Plan to include:
                  1.   building disposition
                  2.   building configuration
                  3.   building functiona
                  4.   parking location standards
                  5.   landscape standards
                  6.   signage standards
                  7.   drainage standards
                  8.   architectural standards
                  9.   lighting standards
                  10.   sound standards
                  11.   conveyance instrument of all cross access easements for
joint use of parking or drive area (such easements shall be in effect when a
reciprocal easement with the adjoining property owner is established)
         B.   Civic Zones
            i.   All large scale developments shall have a minimum of one civic
zone.
               a.   Civic zones shall comply with Tables 2, 3, 5 and 9.
               b.   Civic zones dedicated for public use shall be required for
each planned development and designated on the Planned Development.
               c.   Civic zones dedicated for public use shall be required for
each small-scale development. Such civic zones shall include and comply with
pedestrian-oriented space and feature requirements.
         C.   Thoroughfares
            i.   Thoroughfares shall conform to Tables 5, 6, and 7.
            ii.   For large-scale developments with multiple out lots along
East National Road, access to these parcels shall be provided from a public or
private internal roadway system.
      (4)   Small-scale development standards
         A.   Small-scale development process
            i.   Small-scale developments in the corridor plan area shall be
developed in compliance with the mandatory requirements of this chapter and the
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
            ii.   Small -scale developments in the corridor plan area shall
comply with all relevant requirements set forth in the Overall Corridor small-
scale development standards
1142.03 (a) 4 A, and the transect specific Small-scale development standards
1142.03 (b) - (e).
            iii.   Building and project area site plans submitted under this
code shall show the following, in compliance with the standards described in
this code:
               a.   building disposition
               b.   building configuration
               c.   building function
               d.   parking location standards/pedestrian walkways
               e.   landscape and green space standards
               f.   signage standards
               g.   drainage standards
               h.   architectural standards
               i.   lighting standards
               j.   sound standards
               k.   civic zones/ pedestrian-oriented  features
               l.   conveyance instrument of all cross access easements for
joint use of parking or drive area (such easements shall be in effect when a
reciprocal easement with the adjoining property owner is established)
            iv.   Small-scale development building and project area site plans
showing the plan elements listed in
1142.03 (a)(4) shall be included in the plan submitted by the developer when
seeking a building permit.
         B.   Civic Zones
            i.   Civic zones shall comply with Tables 2, 3, 5 and 9.
            ii.   Civic zones dedicated for public use shall be required for
each small-scale development. Such civic zones shall include and comply with
pedestrian-oriented space and feature requirements.
         C.   Lot Configuration:
            i.   The purpose and intent of lot configuration regulations is to
create a lot dimension that fulfills the goals of this chapter's transect-based
land use system and limited access roadway system. Lot and streets should
effectively use land, protect land value, protect natural features, and safely
organize traffic. Lots and streets in each district should be compatible and
should have transitioning features from the urban areas to rural areas to
retain natural infrastructure and visual character.
            ii.   Lots shall conform to Tables 3, 4, 5 and 10.
            iii.   Parcels shall be required to connect to adjoining properties
to provide cross access for parking, drive ways to connect adjoining properties
with public thoroughfares, and pedestrian walkways.  Cross access shall be
established with easements. Such easement shall be in effect when a reciprocal
easement with the adjoining property owner is established.
         D.   Building Configuration:
            i.   The purpose of  building configuration standards is to enforce
the physical and visual connection between businesses, streets, residents, and
open spaces in order to create a vibrant and attractive business and
streetscape environment in urban areas, and retain natural infrastructure and
visual character in rural areas.
            ii.   Building site plans shall comply with Tables 3-12.
            iii.   Landscaping, building height, building location and
orientation, massing, and architectural style should reflect district
characteristics.
         E.   Architectural:
            i.   The purpose of architectural standards is to preserve, promote
and enhance the historic, archeological, cultural, scenic, natural and
recreational characteristics that are the intrinsic qualities of the East
National Road Corridor by supporting the goals of the East National Road
Corridor Plan and the Ohio Historic National Road Corridor Management Plan.
            ii.   Architectural elevations shall comply with the transect
specific standards in the chapter and all applicable standards in other
chapters of the zoning code.
         F.   Screening
            i.   The purpose of screening standards is to provide compatible
screening of parking from streets and transition between residential
neighborhoods and businesses.
            ii.   Screening shall comply with the transect specific standards
in the chapter and all applicable standards in other chapters of the zoning
code.
         G.   Landscaping
            i.   The purpose of landscape standards is to provide uniform
standards for the development and maintenance of the landscaping of private
property and public rights-of-way. The purpose of landscaping is to increase
the compatibility between different intensities of land uses by providing
visual barriers that minimize the impacts of noise, light and glare, interrupt
the barren expanse of paved parking lots, contribute to the image and appeal of
the community, and enhance property values.
            ii.   Landscaping, green space, and impervious surface coverage
shall conform to Tables 3,5,  and 9.
            iii.   Landscaping and tress shall comply with the transect
specific standards in the chapter and all applicable standards in other
chapters of the zoning code.
         H.   Lighting
            i.   The purpose of lighting standards is to establish lighting
compatible with the development as well as the surrounding area and
streetscape, to promote pedestrian and vehicular safety, and to improve the
aesthetic appearance of public and private streetlights.
            ii.   Lighting intensity shall conform to Table 12.
            iii.   Lighting type shall conform to Graphic 1
            iv.   Lighting shall comply with the transect specific standards in
the chapter and all applicable standards in other chapters of the zoning code.
         I.   Sound
            i.   The purpose of sound standards is to establish sound levels
compatible with the development as well as the surrounding area.
            ii.   Sound intensity shall conform to Table 8.
         J.   Signage
            i.   Signs shall comply with the transect specific standards in the
chapter and all applicable standards in other chapters of the zoning code.
         K.   Parking Location and Drive
            i.   The purpose of parking and drive standards is to minimize the
impact of parking and drive facilities by treating them in a manner that does
not dominate the main structures or pedestrian realm, maintain the viability of
the businesses, maximize lot connectivity within a limited access roadway
system, and promote public safety.
            ii.   Parcels shall be required to connect to adjoining properties
to provide cross access for parking, drive ways to connect adjoining properties
with public thoroughfares and pedestrian walkways.  Cross access shall be
established with easements. Such easement shall be in effect when a reciprocal
easement with the adjoining property owner is established.
            iii.   Parking shall comply with Table 4, 5, and 6.
            iv.   Private and public drives shall comply with Tables 5-7.
            v.   Parking should be accessed by rear drives, alleys or streets.
            vi.   Shared parking shall be used wherever possible.
            vii.   Facilities to accommodate mass transit should be utilized
where mass transit is available to the site.
            viii.Structured parking shall be located in the rear yard and
conform to development standards specified in the chapter.
         L.   Natural Drainage
            i.   Trees should be planted below the grade of the sidewalk and
the street in structural cells with sufficient root space. Trees shall comply
with the city's approved tree List.
            ii.   Green walls, if provided, should be restricted native
species.
            iii.   Native plant perennial landscapes should replace turf grass
wherever possible and be highly diverse. These should be placed lower than
walkways, not mounded up.
            iv.   Planter boxes should be bottomless, flow-through boxes with
native plants, placed next to buildings and designed to capture building
runoff. They may be placed in courtyards or adjacent sidewalks with runoff sent
to them via French drains or hidden pipes.
      5.   Off Site Improvements
         A.   ROW Improvements: Public Frontages
            i.   Public frontages should conform to Tables 4, 5, 6, 7, 10 and
11.
            ii.   Within the public frontages, the prescribed types of planting
and lighting should comply with the Chapter
1158 approved tree list and Tables 5, 10, 11, and 12. The spacing may be
adjusted to accommodate specific site conditions.
            iii.   Right-of-Way width of 40 feet or less shall be exempt from
the tree requirement in Chapter
1158.
          B.   Thoroughfare standards
            i.   Roadway standards should comply with Tables 5, 6, and 7.
            ii.   Thoroughfares should be designed in context with land use and
the transect zones through which they pass.
            iii.   All thoroughfares should terminate at other thoroughfares,
forming a network. Internal drives shall connect to those on adjacent sites at
cross access easement connections in all cases in which it is possible or
necessary for traffic and access management.
 
   (b)   Urban Old Town: Transect 6
      (1)   Large-scale development standards
         A.   Civic Zones
            i.   Each planned development shall include a privately maintained
pedestrian accessible green or urban civic space according to Tables 2, 3, 5,
and 9.
            ii.   Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Tables 5 and
9.
      (2)   Small-scale development standards
         A.   Civic Zones
            i.   Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Tables 3, 5 and
9.
            ii.   Each small-scale development shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated feature along its main street frontage, at a minimum one
feature every 100 feet of frontage.
         B.   Lot configuration
            i.   Lots shall be accessed from the rear yard whenever possible.
         C.   Building Configuration
            i.   The placement of new buildings in urban settings should be
consistent with existing structures in order to maintain the "building wall"
that defines the road in these settings.
            ii.   Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets, open
spaces or plazas. Buildings may not be located in the rear yard of lots, see
Graphic 2: Prohibited rear yard building configuration, and Graphic 3: Required
front yard building configuration.
            iii.   Solid, blank façades and service areas shall be oriented
away from public streets.
            iv.   The principal entrance shall be on a frontage line.
            v.   Façades facing public streets or public spaces should have
physical or visual connections with such streets or spaces by having a
combination of prominent primary or secondary entrances, display windows, and
transparent façades.
         D.   Architectural 
            i.   Each development shall employ required vernacular
characteristics and a minimum of two recommended characteristics for a single
vernacular style type, per Section
1142.02  (v)(1) of the definitions. 
            ii.   Building façades facing public streets shall incorporate a
main entrance door on the street. Building entrances may include doors to
individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-
oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
            iii.   For commercial uses, at least sixty (60) percent of each
building façade facing public streets shall be transparent window glass or open
from a height of 3 feet from the ground to 9 feet from the ground.
            iv.   For all non-single family residential uses, at least thirty
(30) percent of each building façade facing public streets shall be transparent
window glass or open.
            v.   Building façades shall be a minimum of two (2) stories [twenty
(20) feet] in height from the nearest street grade.  If the building does not
actually have at least two (2) stories, then it shall have appropriate
architectural detail to appear to have a second story. This may be accomplished
by extending the façade to a height of twenty (20) feet.
            vi.   Hard surfaced exterior wall materials are required for all
nonresidential uses. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas,
locations that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone or plaster/
stucco.
            vii.   Materials used on exterior walls and roofs should not be
more than 30% highly reflective glass, such as tempered or mirrored glass.
Highly tinted glass or glass tinted in unnatural colors or with a highly
reflective finish should be avoided.
            viii.   Exterior materials may artificially simulate natural
materials.
            ix.   Prohibited exterior materials on visible elevations for all
nonresidential uses include corrugated metal panels, siding, and wood used as a
finish material. Visible elevations are those elevations visual from a public
street or parking area.
            x.   Canopies, awnings, roof and floor overhangs, and colonnades
are encouraged as protection to pedestrians.
            xi.   Rooftops should include architectural rooflines, such as
cornices or exterior molding.
            xii.   Residential uses should include outdoor balconies.
            xiii.   Outdoor seating is recommended for food service uses.
Outdoor seating shall be of metal, natural stone, or brick material. If the
outdoor seating is not firmly attached to the ground or to a building, the
outdoor seating shall be constructed so as to be able to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling over or blowing
away.
            xiv.   The height of new buildings should be compatible with
existing adjacent structures. New buildings should have the same number of
floors and be within 10% of the average height of adjacent buildings as viewed
from the street.
            xv.   Rear entrances should be established from rear parking areas.
            xvi.   Fences visible from the street shall not be chain link or
slatted chain link.
         E.   Screening
            i.   In locations where a rear yard fronts a street or is visible
within 150 feet of a street, all parking shall be screened using urban
screening. Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick material
and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a minimum of 10%
opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every 10 feet (See
Graphic 6: Urban Screening).
            ii.   Use of wall and fence materials such as chain link, vinyl,
and concrete block is prohibited.
            iii.   All dumpsters, exterior storage areas, service yards, and
ground mounted mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened from view with
evergreen, masonry, walls, or similar materials.
         F.   Landscaping
            i.   Trees shall not be required along the frontage.
            ii.   The front yard may be paved to match the pavement of the
public frontage.
            iii.   Planter boxes and hanging plants are encouraged. 
         G.   Lighting
            i.   Lighting shall serve to illuminate façades, accentuate
entrances and signage, and provide an adequate level of personal security in
parking areas.
            ii.   All lighting used to illuminate parking areas and signage
shall be shielded to avoid off-site spillage of light to adjacent properties
according to Graphic 1: Cut-off light fixtures.
            iii.   Exterior building lighting shall be required for new
buildings, according to one light every 40 feet.
            iv.   Exterior lighting and site furniture should be
architecturally integrated with the building's style, material, and color.
            v.   Down lighting shall be used along pedestrian walkways and
along building façades facing the street. One light shall be placed every 40
feet along pedestrian walkways and building façades facing the street.
         H.   Signage
            i.   There shall be no signage permitted additional to that
specified in this section. Sign size and location shall comply with Chapter
1155.
            ii.   The number of signs shall be limited to one building-mounted
wall sign. In addition, one ground-mounted free standing or monument sign may
be permitted if the building has an existing front yard with a minimum depth of
20 feet.
            iii.   Signs in urban areas should compliment the building to which
it is attached and be harmonious with the other signage in the district.
            vi.   Signage shall be externally illuminated, except that signage
appearing through shopfront glazing may be neon lit.
            v.   Signs fitting the character of downtown should be used.
            vi.   Projecting signs should be used.
         I.   Parking Location and Drive
            i.   Parking shall be provided in the rear or side of the building.
In locations where a rear or side yard fronts a street or is visible within 150
feet of a street, parking shall be screened using urban screening (see Graphic
6: Urban Screening). Urban screening shall consist of a natural stone or brick
material and iron or similar material. Urban screening shall consist of a
minimum of 10% opacity by including, at a minimum, one masonry post once every
10 feet.
            ii.   When access to parking is required from the main street, no
more than one access point shall be permitted. Shared access points for
multiple property owners are strongly encouraged.
            iii.   Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or lanes when such
are available.
            iv.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian exits from
all parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be directly to a
frontage line and to a building, see Graphic 5: Walkway connecting the sidewalk
and parking lot with the building.
            v.   Parking lots shall be lighted so that no parking space is more
than 60 feet from a light pole.
            vi.   A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within
the public or private frontage for every ten vehicular parking spaces.
 
   (c)   Urban Commercial Corridor: Transect 5
      (1)   Large-scale development standards
         a.   Civic zones:
            i.   Each planned development shall include a privately maintained
green or urban civic space according to Tables 2, 3, 5 and 9 that is pedestrian
accessible.
            ii.   Each pedestrian walkway shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated feature every 100 feet.
      (2)   Small-scale development standards
         A.   Civic Zones
            i.   Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Tables 3, 5 and
9.
            ii.   Each small-scale development shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated feature along its pedestrian walkway. Each pedestrian
walkway shall contain at least one pedestrian-orientated feature every 60 feet.
         B.   Lot configuration
            i.   Lots should be similar in dimension (length and width) to
adjoining lots, according to Tables 5 and 11.
         C.   Building Configuration
            i.   Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets, open
spaces or plazas. Buildings may not be located in the rear yard of lots, see
Graphic 2: Prohibited rear yard building configuration, and Graphic 3: Required
front yard building configuration.
            ii.   Solid, blank façades and service areas shall be oriented away
from public streets.
            iii.   An entrance and window shall be oriented to face the pubic
street.
            iv.   Façades facing public streets or public spaces shall have
physical or visual connections with such streets or spaces by having a
combination of primary or secondary entrances, display windows, or transparent
façades.
         D.   Architecturala
            i.   The exterior finish material on all non-residential façades
shall be limited to brick, cementitious siding and/or stucco.
            ii.   Streetscreens should be constructed of a material matching
the adjacent building or screening façade.
            iii.   Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited
along frontages.
         E.   Screening
            i.   Parking areas that front a road shall be screened with a
minimum 4-foot high combination of hedge and masonry wall or stone element.
Each stone element shall be a minimum of 3-feet high and no more than 4-feet
high, and a minimum of 1-foot wide. Stone elements do not have a maximum width.
Stone elements may assume a variety of structures - including boulders,
pillars, columns, stone, or similar man-made or natural creations. Masonry
walls and columns shall consist of a uniform brick or stone material.
Artificial stone or brick screening materials may simulate natural materials. 
Screening shall consist of a minimum of 100 percent opacity to the three-foot
height (see Graphic 7: Stone and hedge screening).
            ii.   If masonry wall or vernacular stone elements are included in
streetscapes, screening shall include, at a minimum, one masonry column or
stone element every a) 10 feet for lots less than 100 feet in frontage, b) 15
feet for lots with more than 100 feet but less than 200 feet in frontage, or c)
20 feet for lots with more than 200 feet in frontage.   
            iii.   Masonry wall or vernacular stone elements in streetscreens
shall be constructed of a uniform material along all contiguous small-scale
development street frontages.
            iv.   Streetscreens should be constructed of a material
complementary to the adjacent building façades.
            v.   The use of wall and fence materials such as chain link, vinyl,
and concrete block is prohibited.
            vi.   All dumpsters, exterior storage areas, service yards, and
groundmounted mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened from view with
evergreen plant material, simple wood fences, or masonry walls.
         F.   Lighting
            i.   All lighting used to illuminate parking areas and signage
shall be shielded to avoid off-site spillage of light to adjacent properties
according to Graphic 1: Cut-off light fixtures.
            ii.   Down lighting shall be used to reinforce pedestrian walkways
and along building façades facing the street. One light shall be placed every
40 feet along pedestrian walkways and building façades facing the street.
         G.   Signage
            i.   There shall be no signage permitted additional to that
specified in this section. Sign size and location shall comply with Chapter
1155.
            ii.   The number of signs shall be limited to one building-mounted
wall sign along with one ground-mounted free standing or monument sign.
            iii.   Wall signs should be lit by inconspicuous building-mounted
fixtures with a concealed light source, except as provided in subsection (v)
below.
            iv.   Monument signs should be up-lit from a ground-mounted fixture
with a concealed light source.
            v.   Internally illuminated sign cabinets are permitted if the
cabinet is opaque with only the sign text illuminated.
            vi.   Monument signs shall be composed of hard surfaced exterior
materials. This can include brick, parged block (at service areas, locations
that might be used for wall murals), painted brick, stone or plaster/stucco.
            vii.    Signage shall be externally illuminated, except that
signage appearing through the shopfront glazing may be neon lit and except as
provided in subsection (v).
         H.   Parking Location and Drive
            i.   Parking shall be provided in the side or rear of a building.
In locations where a rear or side yard fronts a street or is visible within 150
feet of a street, parking in the rear or side yard shall be screened. Parking
areas that front a road shall be screened with a minimum 4' high combination of
hedge and/or masonry wall or stone element (see Graphic 7: Stone and hedge
screening).
            ii.   The number of vehicular access points (or driveways) in
commercial main street areas shall be minimized to avoid conflicts with other
vehicles and with pedestrians along the urban street frontage.
            iii.   Access to parking areas from rear or side yards shall be
provided. Adjoining parking lots shall connect by means of cross access
easements, whenever possible.
            iv.   When access to parking is required from the main street, no
more than one access point shall be permitted. Shared access points for
multiple property owners are strongly encouraged.
            v.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways from
all parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be provided directly to
a frontage line and to a building (see Graphic 5: Walkway connecting the
sidewalk and parking lot with the building).
            vi.   Parking lots shall be lighted so that no parking space is
more than 60 feet from a light pole.
            vii.   A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within
the public or private frontage for every 25 vehicular parking spaces.
 
   (d)   Suburban Fringe: Transect 4
      (1)   Large-scale development standards
         A.   Civic Zones
            i.   Each planned development shall include a privately maintained
pedestrian accessible green or urban civic space according to Tables 2, 3, 5
and 9.
            ii.   Each pedestrian walkway shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated space every 100 feet.
      (2)   Small-scale development standards
         A.   Civic zone
            i.   Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Tables 3, 5 and
9.
            ii.   Each small-scale development shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated feature along its pedestrian walkway. Each pedestrian
walkway shall contain at least one pedestrian-orientated feature every 60 feet.
         B.   Lot configuration
            i.   Lots shall be clustered within the development such that
smaller lots are clustered along East National Road and larger lots are placed
the greatest distances from East National Road. Smaller out-lots shall be
placed along the road frontage to visually mitigate the large parking area to
serve the retail center.
            ii.   A landscaped setback shall be provided between the road and
the out-lot buildings.
            iii.   Smaller lots shall be clustered along East National Road and
shall front public or private internal drives established by easement for the
benefit of all property owners within the development and shall connect to
cross access easements proving ingress and egress to abutting properties.
Easements shall be provided for private internal drives. 
            iv.   All lots shall connect with a public or private internal
drive network established by easement for the benefit of all property owners
within the development and shall connect to cross access easements proving
ingress and egress to abutting properties that also shall include pedestrian
walks, and may include on public or private on street parking spaces.
Documented easements shall be provided for private drives.  Easements shall be
provided for private internal drives. 
         C.   Building Configuration
            i.   Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets, civic
spaces or plazas. Buildings may not be located in the rear yard of lots, see
Graphic 2: Prohibited rear yard building configuration, and Graphic 3: Required
front yard building configuration.
            ii.   Façades facing public streets or civic spaces shall have
physical or visual connection with such streets or spaces by having a
combination of primary or secondary entrances, display windows, and transparent
façades.
            iii.   In large scale developments, smaller out-lot buildings shall
be placed along the road frontage to visually mitigate the large parking area
to serve the retail center. Lots sharing a lot line with East National Road
shall treat the yard facing the frontage with East National Road as the front
yard.
            iv.   In large scale developments, buildings shall be clustered
along East National Road and shall have ingress/egress on internal drives.
            v.   In large scale developments, buildings shall be clustered
within the development such that no more than 50% of a development's overall
building square footage is developed in physical or structural contiguity.
            vi.   In large scale and small scale developments, paved parking
areas shall be clustered within the development such that no more than 33% of a
development's overall parking square footage is developed in physical
contiguity. Parking area clusters shall be separated by buildings, civic spaces
with pedestrian features, or drives with on-street parking and pedestrian
walkways on each side.
            vii.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways
shall connect all buildings and all parking areas (see Graphic 2). 
         D.   Architectural
            i.   Vernacular building materials such as brick, stucco and stone
shall be used in all new construction. New construction should reflect some of
the basic detailing of adjacent original structures such as window and door
sizes, cornice lines, and brick or stone patterning and accents. Each
development shall employ required vernacular characteristics and a minimum of
two recommended characteristics for a single vernacular style type, per Section
1142.02  (v)(1) of the definitions. 
            ii.    The exterior finish material on all non-residential façades
shall be limited to brick, cementitious siding and/or stucco.
            iii.   Adjoining buildings and tenant spaces shall appear to be
independent structures with the use of staggered building façades, varied
exterior materials, and varied rooflines or cornices for each tenant space.
            iv.   Street screens should be constructed of a material matching
the adjacent building façade.
            v.   Street screens shall have openings no larger than necessary to
allow automobile and pedestrian access.
            vi.   Parking structures shall be in the rear yard.
         E.   Screening
            i.   Parking areas that front a road shall be screened with a
minimum 4' high combination of hedge and masonry wall or stone element. Each
stone element shall be a minimum of 3 feet high and no more than 4 feet high,
and a minimum of 1 foot wide. Stone elements do not have a maximum width. Stone
elements may assume a variety of structures - including boulders, pillars,
columns, stone, or similar man-made or natural creations. Masonry walls and
columns shall consist of a uniform brick or stone material. Artificial stone or
brick screening materials may simulate natural materials.  Screening shall
consist of a minimum of 100% opacity to the three foot height (see Graphic 7:
Stone and hedge screening).
            ii.   If masonry wall or vernacular stone elements are included in
streetscapes, screening shall include, at a minimum, one masonry column or
stone element every a) 10 feet for lots less than 100 feet in frontage, b) 15
feet for lots with more than 100 feet but less than 200 feet in frontage, or c)
20 feet for lots with more than 200 feet in frontage.   
            iii.   Masonry wall or vernacular stone elements in streetscreens
shall be constructed of a uniform material along all contiguous small-scale
development street frontages.
            iv.   Streetscreens should be constructed of a material
complementary to the adjacent building façades.
            v.   The use of wall and fence materials such as chain link, vinyl,
and concrete block is prohibited.
            vi.   All dumpsters, exterior storage areas, service yards, and
groundmounted mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened from view with
evergreen plant material, simple wood fences, or masonry walls.
         F.   Lighting
            i.   All lighting used to illuminate parking areas and signage
shall be shielded to avoid off-site spillage of light to adjacent properties
according to Graphic 1: Cut-off light fixtures.
            ii.   Down lighting shall be used to reinforce pedestrian walkways
and along building façades facing the street. One light shall be placed every
60 feet along pedestrian walkways and building façades facing the street.
         G.   Signage
            i.   There shall be no signage permitted additional to that
specified in this section. Sign size and location shall comply with Chapter
1155.
            ii.   The number of signs shall be limited to one building-mounted
wall sign for each business and one ground-mounted monument sign for each
building.
            iii.   In addition, one overall development monument sign may be
permitted for each planned development. 
            iv.   Wall signs should be lit by inconspicuous building-mounted
fixtures with a concealed light source.
            v.   Monument signs should be up-lit from a ground-mounted fixture
with a concealed light source, except as provided in subsection (v).
            vi.   Internally illuminated sign cabinets are permitted if the
cabinet is opaque with only the sign text illuminated.
            vii.   Monument signs shall be composed of hard surfaced exterior
materials for all uses. This can include brick, parged block, painted brick,
stone, or plaster/stucco.
            viii.   Signage shall be externally illuminated, except that
signage appearing through the shopfront glazing may be neon lit and except as
provided in subsection (v).
         H.   Parking Location and Drive
            i.   In large and small scale developments, parking areas shall be
clustered within the development such that no more than 33% of a development's
overall parking square footage is developed in physical contiguity. Parking
area clusters shall be separated by buildings, civic spaces with pedestrian
features, or drives with on-street parking and pedestrian walkways on each
side.
            ii.   Parking shall be provided in the side or rear of a building.
In locations where a rear or side yard fronts a street or is visible within 150
feet of a street, parking in the rear or side yard shall be screened. Parking
areas that front a road shall be screened with a minimum 4' high combination of
hedge and/or masonry wall or stone element (see Graphic 7: Stone and hedge
screening).
            iii.   Parking areas shall be provided in rear or side yards. All
rear and side yard adjoining parking lots shall connect.
            iv.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways
from all parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be provided
directly to each building, (see Graphic 5: Walkway connecting the sidewalk and
parking lot with the building).
            v.   When access to parking is required from the main street, no
more than one access point shall be permitted. Shared access points for
multiple property owners are strongly encouraged.
            vi.   For large developments with multiple out lots along East
National Road, access to these parcels shall be provided from an internal
roadway system.
            vii.   When access is provided from an internal roadway system,
stacking distances for traffic entering and exiting large developments shall be
provided in order to minimize conflicts and backups onto the road.
            viii.   Parking lots shall be lighted so that no parking space is
more than 60 feet from a light pole.
            ix.   A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within
the development for every fifty vehicular parking spaces.
            x.   All parking lots and parking structures shall be located at
the rear or side yard.
 
   (e)   Rural Research Park: Transect 3 
      (1)   Large-scale development standards
         A.   Civic Zones
            i.   Each planned development shall include privately maintained
pedestrian accessible green or urban civic space according to Tables 2, 3, and
5.
            ii.   Each planned development shall assign at least 15% of its
area to civic space.
            iii.   Each planned development shall include pedestrian features
in the civic space.
      (2)   Small-scale development standards
         A.   Civic zone
            i.   Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Tables 3, 5 and
9.
            ii.   Each small-scale development shall contain at least one
pedestrian-orientated feature along its pedestrian walkways. Each pedestrian
walkway shall contain at least one pedestrian-orientated feature every 60 feet.
         B.   Lot configuration
            i.   In large-scale developments, lots shall be clustered within
the development such that the largest lots are clustered along East National
Road and smaller lots are placed the greatest distances from East National
Road. Larger out-lots shall be placed along the road frontage to visually
mitigate the density and intensity of smaller lots in the development.
            ii.   Lot entrances shall be immediately evidenced from streets.
            iii.   Second entrances should directly access parking.
            iv.   Larger lots shall be clustered along East National Road and
shall have ingress and egress for internal drives.
            v.   All lots shall connect with a public or private internal drive
network established by easement for the benefit of all property owners within
the development and shall connect to cross access easements proving ingress and
egress to abutting properties that also shall include pedestrian walks, and may
include on public or private on street parking spaces. Documented easements
shall be provided for private drives.  Easements shall be provided for private
internal drives. 
         C.   Building Configuration
            i.   One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to
the rear of the building may be built on each lot.
            ii.   New structures shall be oriented so that the front door of
the structure is not visible from East National Road.
            iii.   Larger out-lot buildings shall be placed along the road
frontage and provide a green setback between the road and the out-lot
buildings.
            iv.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways
shall connect all buildings and all parking areas (see Graphic 2). 
         D.   Architectural
            i.   The exterior finish material is limited to brick, stone,
cementitious siding and/or stucco.
            ii.   Windows above the first story shall not exceed 50% of the
total building wall area with each floor of every story's façade being
calculated independently.
         E.   Screening
            i.   Parking areas that front a road shall be screened with a
minimum 4' high combination of hedge and masonry wall or stone element. Each
stone element shall be a minimum of 3 feet high and no more than 4 feet high,
and a minimum of 1 foot wide. Stone elements do not have a maximum width. Stone
elements may assume a variety of structures - including boulders, pillars,
columns, stone, or similar man-made or natural creations. Masonry walls and
columns shall consist of a uniform brick or stone material. Artificial stone or
brick screening materials may simulate natural materials.  Screening shall
consist of a minimum of 100% opacity to the three foot height (see Graphic 7:
Stone and hedge screening).
            ii.   If masonry wall or vernacular stone elements are included in
streetscapes, screening shall include at a minimum, one masonry column or stone
element every (a) 10 feet for lots less than 100 feet in frontage, (b) 20 feet
for lots with more than 100 feet but less than 200 feet in frontage, or (c) 30
feet for lots with more than 200 feet in frontage.   
            iii.   Masonry wall or vernacular stone elements in streetscreens
shall be constructed of a uniform material along all contiguous small-scale
development street frontages.
            iv.   Streetscreens should be constructed of a material
complementary to the adjacent building façades.
            v.   The use of wall and fence materials such as chain link, vinyl,
and concrete block is prohibited.
            vi.   All dumpsters, exterior storage areas, service yards, and
groundmounted mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened from view with
evergreen plant material, simple wood fences, or masonry walls.
         F.   Landscaping
            i.   The front yard shall not be paved, with the exception of
driveways.
            ii.   Native prairie grass should be used in all open spaces. 
            iii.   Trees shall be of multiple species.
            iv.   Trees may be naturalistically clustered.
         G.   Lighting
            i.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways
shall connect all buildings and all parking areas. 
            ii.   Underground electric service is recommended for all site
lighting.
            iii.   All lighting used to illuminate parking areas and signage
shall be shielded to avoid off-site spillage of light to adjacent properties
according to Graphic 1: Cut-off light fixtures.
         H.   Signage
            i.   There shall be no signage permitted additional to that
specified in this section. Sign size and location shall comply with Chapter
1155.
            ii.   The number of signs shall be limited to one building-mounted
wall sign for each business, and one ground-mounted monument sign for each
building.
            iii.   In addition, one overall development monument sign may be
permitted for each planned development. 
            iv.   Wall signs should be lit by inconspicuous building-mounted
fixtures with a concealed light source.
            v.   Monument signs should be up-lit from a ground-mounted fixture
with a concealed light source.
            vi.   Internally illuminated sign cabinets may be appropriate, if
the cabinet is opaque with only the sign text illuminated.
            vii.   Monument signs shall be composed of hard surfaced exterior
materials for all uses. This can include brick, parged block, painted brick,
stone, or plaster/stucco.
            viii.   Directional signs shall be setback 100 feet form the right
of way.
         I.   Parking Location and Drive
            i.   Whenever possible, parking shall be in the rear or side lot of
a building.
            ii.   Parking shall be provided in the side or rear of a building.
In locations where a rear or side yard fronts a street or is visible within 150
feet of a street, parking in the rear or side yard shall be screened. Parking
areas that front a road shall be screened with a minimum 4' high combination of
hedge and/or masonry wall or stone element.
            iii.   Safe, lighted, and clearly identified pedestrian walkways
shall connect all buildings and all parking areas (see Graphic 2).
 
1142.04  TABLES AND GRAPHICS.
 
 
Table 1: Transect Zone Geographic Description
Geographic segment of East National Segment Title             Transect zone
Road Corridor Study Area
Spring St. to Greenmount St.        Urban Old Town            Transect 6 (T6)
Greenmount St. to Burnett Rd.       Urban Commercial Corridor Transect 5 (T5)
Burnett Rd. to Bird Rd.             Suburban Fringe           Transect 4 (T4)
Bird Rd. to Titus Rd.               Rural Research Park       Transect 3 (T3)
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3738.jpg]
 
 
 
Table 2: Land Use Large Scale Planned Development Density and Composition
Standards:
All percentages are gross areas as a percentage of gross development plan land
area, to be measured in square feet.
             Maximum Maximum                        Maximum            Minimum
             Gross   Gross   Maximum    Maximum     Gross     Expected Gross
Land Use     Office  R&D     Gross      Gross       Parking   Gross    Civic
District     Floor   Floor   Commercial Residential and Drive Right of Open
             Area    Area    Floor Area Floor Area  Area      Way Area Space
                                                                       Area
Main Street  25%     0%      25%        10%         20%       10%      10%
Mixed Core
Premier Auto 10%     0%      10%        0%          60%       10%      10%
Market Core
Urban
Commercial   10%     0%      25%        0%          40%       10%      15%
Center
Mixed Use    30%     0%      10%        10%         10%       20%      20%
Center
Commercial   0%      0%      20%        0%          35%       20%      25%
Town Center
Mixed-Use
Conservation 0%      0%      15%        30%         20%       20%      30%
Edge
Mixed Use
R&D          0%      10%     0%         0%          30%       20%      40%
Commercial
Edge
Highway
Rural Retail 0%      0%      15%        0%          25%       20%      40%
Edge
 
 
 
Table 3: Land Use Small Scale Development Density Composition Standards:
All percentages are gross areas as a percentage of gross project site plan
area, to be measured in square feet.
                     Maximum Gross       Maximum Gross     Minimum Gross Civic
Land Use District    Building Floor Area Parking and Drive Open Space Area
                                         Area
Main Street Mixed    85%                 10%               5%
Core
Premier Auto Market  80%                 60%               10%
Core
Urban Commercial     50%                 50%               10%
Center
Mixed Use Center     40%                 50%               15%
Commercial Town      40%                 50%               20%
Center
Mixed Use            40%                 40%               20%
Conservation Edge
Mixed Use R&D        35%                 60%               15%
Commercial Edge
Highway Rural Retail 25%                 50%               30%
Edge
 
 
 
Table 4: Land Use Building and Parking Standards
                                   Minimum                             Minimum    Maximum
             Minimum    Minimum    Building                            On-site    On-site
             Building   Parking    and      Maximum    Minimum Maximum Parking    Parking
District     Front      Front      Parking  Front      Height  Height  Space per  Space per
             Setback    Setback    Side and Setback                    Square     Square
                                   Rear                                Foot       Foot
                                   Setback
Main Street  0 Feet     Not        0 Feet   10 Feet    20 Feet 50 Feet Not        1 /500 SF
Mixed Core              Applicable                                     Applicable
Premier Auto 0 Feet     5 Feet     0 Feet   45 Feet    20 Feet 45 Feet Not        Not
Market Core                                                            Applicable Applicable
Urban
Commercial   0 Feet     20 Feet    0 Feet   20 Feet    15 Feet 35 Feet 1 /350 SF  1 /200 SF
Center
Mixed Use    0 Feet     20 Feet    5 Feet   20 Feet    15 Feet 35 Feet 1/350 SF   1 /200 SF
Center
Commercial   10 Feet    20 Feet    5 Feet   45 Feet    15 Feet 45 Feet 1/400 SF   1 /230 SF
Town Center
Mixed Use    Not        Not
Conservation Applicable Applicable 5 Feet   25 Feet    15 Feet 35 Feet 1/400 SF   1 /230 SF
Edge
Mixed Use
R&D          100 Feet   100 Feet   15 Feet  Not        25 Feet 75 Feet 1/400 SF   1 /200 SF
Commercial                                  Applicable
Edge
Highway                                     Not
Rural Retail 100 Feet   100 Feet   15 Feet  Applicable 15 Feet 35 Feet 1/400 SF   1 /200 SF
Edge
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3741.jpg]
 
 
 
TABLE 6. VEHICULAR LANE & PARKING ASSEMBLIES:
The following rows and columns identify thoroughfare types to be used
in conjunction with Table 7
          1                                         2                                         3
   NO       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
a. PARKING  44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
            IMAGES/0-0-0-3744.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3747.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3750.jpg]
   PARKING  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b. ONE      44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
   SIDE     IMAGES/0-0-0-3753.jpg]
   PARALLEL
   PARKING  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
c. BOTH     44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
   SIDES    IMAGES/0-0-0-3756.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3759.jpg]
   PARALLEL
   PARKING  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
d. BOTH     44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
   SIDES    IMAGES/0-0-0-3762.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3765.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3768.jpg]
   DIAGONAL
   PARKING  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e. ACCESS   44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
            IMAGES/0-0-0-3771.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3774.jpg]
Credit: Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co.
 
 
 
Table 7: Recommended Internal Project Roadway Types:
The following table is to be used in conjunction with Table 6 to determine
thoroughfares types that are designed in context with land use and the
transect zones through which they pass.
                         Dedicated
Development              Public
Land Use     Use Service Right of  T1     T2     T3     T4     T5     T6
Type         Type        Way Vs.
                         Private
                         Drive
Main Street  Mixed       Public                                       C.1
Mixed Core
Main Street  Mixed       Private                                      A.2 or
Mixed Core               Drive                                        C.1
Premier Auto Auto-       Public                                       C.1
Market Core  Oriented
Premier Auto Auto-       Private                                      A.2 or
Market Core  Oriented    Drive                                        C.1
Urban        Auto-
Commercial   Oriented    Public                                C.1
Center
Urban        Auto-       Private                               A.2 or
Commercial   Oriented    Drive                                 C.1
Center
Mixed Use    Mixed       Public                                C.1
Center
Mixed Use    Mixed       Private                               A.2 or
Center                   Drive                                 C.1
Commercial   Mixed       Public                         C.1 or
Town Center  Commercial                                 C.2
                                                        D.1 or
Commercial   Mixed       Private                        D.2 or
Town Center  Commercial  Drive                          D.3 or
                                                        A.1
Mixed Use    Mixed                               C.1 or C.1 or
Conservation Commercial  Public                  C.2    C.2
Edge
Mixed Use
Conservation Green Space Public                  C.1    C.1
Edge
Mixed Use                                        C.1 or C.1 or
Conservation Residential Public                  B.1    B.1
Edge
Mixed Use                                        C.1 or C.1 or
Conservation Mixed       Private                 D.3 or D.3 or
Edge         Commercial                          A.1 or A.1 or
                                                 A.2    A.2
Mixed Use                                        C.1 or C.1 or
Conservation Green Space Private                 D.3 or D.3 or
Edge                                             A.2    A.2
Mixed Use                                        C.1 or C.1 or
Conservation Residential Private                 A.2    A.2
Edge
Mixed Use
R&D          R&D         Public                  A.2 or
Commercial                                       A.3
Edge
Mixed Use                                        A.2 or
R&D          R&D         Private                 A.3 or
Commercial                                       C.1
Edge
Highway      Mixed                        A.1 or
Rural Retail Commercial  Private          A.2
Edge
             Green                 A.1 or
Green Space  Space/      Private   A.2
             Residential
 
 
 
Table 8: Sound Standards:
Sound levels measured at the building frontage line shall not exceed maximum
decibels from sunrise to midnight and maximum decibels from midnight to
sunrise.
                                         T1    T2    T3    T4    T5    T6
maximum decibels from sunrise to midnight 65 db 65 db 65 db 70 db 70 db 80 db
maximum decibels from midnight to sunrise 55 db 55 db 55 db 60 db 60 db 60 db
 
 
 
TABLE 9: Civic Space.
The intended types of civic space are diagrammed and described in this table. The diagrams are only illustrative;
specific designs would be prepared in accordance to the verbal descriptions on this table.
Park: a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. A park may
be independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape shall
consist of pedestrian walkways and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland
and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks may be lineal,
following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be 8
acres.
Square: an open space available for unstructured recreation and civic
purposes. A square is spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape
shall consist of pedestrian walkways, lawns and trees, formally disposed.
Squares shall be located at the intersection of important thoroughfares. The
minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres.
Green: an open space available for unstructured recreation.  A green may be [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. Its         44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
landscape shall consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. The    IMAGES/0-0-0-3777.jpg]
minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres.
Plaza: an open space available for civic purposes and commercial activities.
A plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape
shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be
located at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size shall be
1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
Playground: an open space designed and equipped for the recreation of
children. A playground should be fenced and may include an open shelter.
Playgrounds shall be interspersed within residential areas and may be placed
within a block. Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There
shall be no minimum or maximum size.
Credit: Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co.
 
 
 
 
TABLE 10: Building Disposition.
This table approximates the location of the building relative to the boundaries of each individual lot. Each of these
very general types is intrinsically more or less urban, depending on the extent that it completes the frontage.
Edgeyard: specific types - single family house, cottage, villa, estate house,
urban villa. A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on
all sides. This is the least urban of types as the front yard sets it back from
the frontage, while the side yards weaken the spatial definition of the public
thoroughfare space. The front yard is intended to be visually continuous with
the yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard can be secured for privacy by
fences and a well-placed backbuilding and/ or outbuilding.
Sideyard: specific types - Charleston single house, double house, zero-lot-line
house, and twin. A building hat occupies one side of the lot with the setback
to the other side. A shallow frontage setback defines a more urban condition.   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
If the adjacent building is similar with a blank side wall, the yard can be     44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
quite private. This type permits systematic climatic orientation in response to IMAGES/0-0-0-3780.jpg]
the sun or the breeze. If a sideyard house abuts a neighboring sideyard house,
the type is known as a twin or double house. Energy costs and sometimes noise
are reduced by sharing a party wall in this disposition.
Rearyard: specific types - townhouse, rowhouse, live-work unit, loft building,
apartment house, mixed use block, flex building, perimeter block. A building
that ccupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard.
This is a very urban type as the continuous façade steadily defines the public
thoroughfare. The rear elevations may be articulated for functional purposes.
In its residential form, this type is the rowhouse. For its commercial form,
the rear yard can accommodate substantial parking.
Courtyard: specific types - patio house. A building that occupies the
boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios.
This is the most urban of types, as it is able to shield the private realm from [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
all sides while strongly defining the public thoroughfare. Because of its       44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
ability to accommodate incompatible activities, masking them from all sides, it IMAGES/0-0-0-3783.jpg]
is recommended for workshops, lodging and schools. The high security provided
by the continuous enclosure is useful for crime-prone areas.
Credit: Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co.
 
 
 
TABLE 11: Definitions Illustrated.
This table provides a number of diagrams to support and clarify the Definitions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3786.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3789.jpg]
Credit: Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co.
 
 
 
Table 12: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
No lighting level measured at the property line shall exceed the following
foot-candles (fc.)
T1     T2     T3     T4     T5      T6
0.5 fc 0.5 fc 0.5 fc 1.0 fc 2.0 fc. 5.0 fc
 
 
 
Graphic 1: Cut-off light fixtures Credit: MSI
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3792.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 2: Prohibited rear yard building configuration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3795.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 3: Required front yard building configuration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3798.jpg]
 
 
 
GRAPHIC 4: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND SHARED VEHICULAR ACCESS DRIVEWAY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3801.jpg]
 
 
 
GRAPHIC 5: WALKWAY CONNECTING THE SIDEWALK AND PARKING LOT WITH THE BUILDING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/ 44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3804.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3807.jpg]
 
 
 
GRAPHIC 6: URBAN SCREENING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3810.jpg]
 
 
 
GRAPHIC 7: STONE AND HEDGE SCREENING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3813.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 8: Vernacular Style: Richardsonian Romanesque
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3816.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 9: Vernacular Style: Tudor Revival
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3819.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 10: Vernacular Style: Neoclassical Revival
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3822.jpg]
 
 
 
Graphic 11: Vernacular Style: Renaissance Revival
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3825.jpg]
 
 
MAPS
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3828.jpg]
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3831.jpg]
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3834.jpg]
 
 
 
TITLE FOUR - Principal Use and Structural Requirements
Chap.
1150   Yard and Area Requirements.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1150
Yard and Area Requirements
 
1150.01   General requirements.
1150.02   Building extensions into yards.
1150.03   Front yard modifications.
 
1150.01  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum yard and area requirements shall apply to the
development of a principal use and building on a lot.
   (a)   The lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width, lot frontage,
front yard, side yard, rear yard, building coverage of a lot, building width,
and floor area ratio shall be in accordance with the table below except as
required by the following Sections (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of
this chapter.
 
 
                  Lot Area Lot Wdth Lot    Front Side  Rear  Bldg     Bldg
District Lot Area /DU      (ft)     Front  Yard  Yard  Yard  Cvrg (%) Wdth FAR
                  (sq ft)           (ft)   (ft)  (ft)  (ft)
A-1      10A      NA       330      60     *2    *3    20    NA       *4   NA
RR-1     1A       NA       105      35     *2    *3    20    NA       *4   NA
RS-5     8400     NA       70       35     25    *5    20    36       *4   NA
RS-8     5000     NA       40       25     25    *6    20    40       *4   NA
RFBH     5000     NA       40       25     25    *6    20    40       NA   NA
RM-12    *7       *7       *7       *7     25    *7    20    50       *4   NA
RM-20    5000     2000     50       35     25    10    20    45       *4   NA
RM-44    5000     1000     50       35     25    10    20    *8       NA   NA
RM-44A   5000     1000     50       35     25    10    20    25       NA   NA
CO-1     NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
CN-1     NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
CN-2     NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
CC-2     NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   2
CB-10    NA       NA       NA       NA     NA    NA    NA    NA       NA   10
CH-1     NA       NA       100      NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
CI-1     NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
RDP      1A       NA       NA       NA     *9    *9    *9    50       NA   NA
M-1      NA       NA       NA       NA     20    NA    NA    NA       NA   1
M-2      NA       NA       NA       NA     100   NA    NA    NA       NA   2
P        NA       NA       NA       NA     NA    NA    NA    NA       NA   NA
 
(Ord. 06-234.  Passed 6-27-06.)
 
Notes:
   *1   In square feet, except where noted in acres.
   *2   According to the following table:
 
 
Thoroughfare Plan     Setback
Street Classification
Major arterial street 90 ft. from the center line of the street at an existing
                      or projected width of 100 ft.
Secondary arterial    65 ft. from the centerline of the street at an existing
                      or projected width of 80 ft.
Collector Street      50 ft. from the center line of the street at an existing
                      or projected width of 60 ft.
 
   *3     Five (5) feet for the first two (2) stories plus two (2) feet for
each additional story.
   *4    Twenty (20) feet for a minimum of 75 percent of the building's
length.  This provision shall not apply to zero lot line dwellings.
   *5     Five (5) feet, except lots platted after the effective date of this
code that do not have at least nine (9) feet of access to the rear yard shall
have one (1) at nine (9) feet.
   *6     Five (5) feet or 10 percent of the lot width, whichever is less; for
zero lot line or attached single-family dwellings, one at zero feet and others
at 10 feet.
   *7     As listed in the following table:
 
 
              Single-Family Single-Family            Duplex &
             (non 0-lot    (0-lot line)  Town House Other Uses Multi-Family
              line)
Lot area (sq  4000          3000          3000       6000       8175
ft)
Lot area/DU   4000          3000          3000       3000       2725
(sq ft)
Lot width     35            30            18         45         60
(ft)
Lot frontage  20            20            18         35         40
(ft)
Side yard     *6            *6            *6         *3         10
(ft)
 
   *8     For low-rise dwellings:  40 percent; for high-rise dwellings:  to be
determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   *9   Front yard shall equal 50 feet, side and rear yards none required,
provided where a lot abuts or is across a street, alley or railroad right-of-
way from an R district, no building, parking or loading area shall be closer to
the district boundary than 150 feet.  However, if screened as provided in
Chapter
1161, a parking area may be located to within 50 feet of an R district. 
(Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (b)   In an R district, lots abutting a primary or secondary arterial
street, as designated on the Land Use Plan map, shall have a front yard line
established 90 feet from the centerline of a primary arterial street and 65
feet from the centerline of a secondary arterial street.
   (c)   Lots that front on two (2) or more streets shall be provided with a
front yard along all streets.
   (d)   Where a frontage is divided amongst districts with different front
yard requirements, the deepest front yard required shall apply to the entire
frontage.
   (e)   Where a lot in a C, RDP or M district abuts an R district, a yard at
least equal to the abutting yard required in the R district shall be provided
along the C, RDP, or M district boundary line.
   (f)   In an R district where more than one (1) principal building is
permitted on a lot, the required yards shall be a follows:
      (1)   The required front, side and rear yards shall be maintained around
all of the principal buildings as if the buildings were considered as one
building on the lot, and
      (2)   Each principal building shall be separated from any other principal
building by a horizontal distance equal the height of the taller building.
   (g)     Residential uses (not including motels and hotels) located at ground
level in a C district, shall be provided with the yards required in the RS-
5 district.
   (h)    In all districts, if a side or rear yard is provided where not
required, the side or rear yard shall be at least five (5) feet wide.
   (i)   In the DMC district, lots abutting a public street shall have a front
yard line established 50 feet from the right-of-way. 
      (Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
 
1150.02  BUILDING EXTENSIONS INTO YARDS.
   The following building extensions or attachments to buildings may be located
within the required yards specified, subject to the special conditions
indicated.
   (a)   Building features.  Eaves, cornices, marquees, awnings, canopies, belt
courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar building features which extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project into any yard provided that
such projections from a building shall not be closer than three (3) feet to a
side or rear lot line.
   (b)   Canopy, gas pump island.  Unenclosed canopies over gas pump islands
shall be no closer than 10 feet to a street.
   (c)   Chimneys.  Chimneys may project into any yard not more than two (2)
feet.
   (d)   Fire escapes and unenclosed stairways.  Fire escapes and unenclosed
stairways may extend into any yard, provided they shall not extend into a side
yard more than four and one-half (4-1/2) feet.
   (e)   Porches, balconies, decks, ramps and stoops, uncovered.  Porches,
balconies, decks, ramps for handicapped persons and stoops which are uncovered,
may extend into any yard, provided that such projections shall not extend into
a front yard more than eight (8) feet and a minimum distance of three (3) feet
from all lot lines for porches, etc.  Stoops may extend into a side yard not
more than two (2) feet.
      (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
   (f)   Windows.  Bay windows and similar projecting windows may extend into
any yard, provided in an R district, they shall not be closer than three (3)
feet to a side lot line.
 
1150.03  FRONT YARD MODIFICATIONS.
   The only front yard exceptions shall be:
   (a)   In any District where a block has 20 percent of the lot frontage on
one side of the street improved with buildings, the minimum front yard for each
lot along the frontage shall be established in the following manner:
      At the option of the owner, the front yard shall be established as the
front yard required in the district in which the lot is located or otherwise as
follows:
      (1)   The minimum front yard for a vacant lot within 100 feet of existing
buildings on each side of the lot shall be established as that space in front
of a line drawn between the closest front corners of the two adjacent existing
buildings.
      (2)   The minimum front yard of a vacant lot within 100 feet of an
existing building on only one side of the lot shall be established as an
average of the setback of the closest front corner of the adjacent existing
building and the depth of the front yard required for the district in which the
lot is located.
      (3)   The minimum front yard of a vacant lot which is not within 100 feet
of an existing building on either side of the lot shall be the front yard
required for the district in which the lot is located.
      (4)   The minimum front yard for a proposed addition to an existing
principal building or accessory building shall be equivalent to the setback of
the closest front corner of the principal building or accessory building.  For
corner lots and double frontage lots, this modification (4) shall apply to each
street and the closest front corner that the principal building or accessory
building setback from that particular street.  For corner lots, this
modification (4) shall not allow an addition to be constructed within a
visibility triangle at all street intersections including at least the area
within the first fifty (50) feet along the intersecting right-of-way lines
(projected if rounded) and a line connecting the ends of such fifty foot
lines.  Similar visibility triangles shall be provided at intersections of
alleys with streets, driveways with streets and alleys with alleys; however,
the measurement along the intersecting lines shall be ten (10) feet instead of
fifty (50).
      (5)   The minimum setback for a proposed detached accessory building
within 100 feet of an existing building on an adjacent lot shall be established
as that area in front of a line drawn between the closest front corners of the
adjacent existing building and the principal building on the lot of the
proposed accessory building.  No garage, however, shall be located closer than
18 feet to the front lot line unless the garage is entered from the side.
      (6)   The minimum front yard for a proposed detached accessory building
which is not located within 100 feet of an existing building on an adjacent lot
shall be established as an average of the closest front corner of the principal
building on the lot of the accessory building and the depth of the front yard
required in the district in which the lot is located.  No garage, however,
shall be located closer than 18 feet to the front lot line unless the garage is
entered from the side.
   (b)   A variance may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals modifying
yard requirements when the owner of a lot demonstrates practical difficulty in
complying with the yard requirements of this code.  To grant a variance, only
the conditions indicated below shall be applied.  In no case, however, may a
variance be granted for more than a 28 percent reduction of the required yard
without applying other conditions of Chapter
1172.06.
      (1)   The essential character of the neighborhood, i.e., adjacent
properties, will not be substantially altered or suffer detriment as a result
of the reduction;
      (2)   There is no other feasible method of solving the property owner's
plight;
      (3)   The spirit and intent behind the yard requirements will be observed
and substantial justice done by granting variance; and
      (4)   The owner's plight in unique or peculiar to the property in
question, not shared with other landowners in the area, and not due to general
conditions in the neighborhood.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1151
Height Requirements
 
1151.01   General requirements.
1151.02   Height exceptions.
 
1151.01  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following maximum height requirements shall apply to the development of
a principal building on a lot.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the height shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residential low-rise buildings:  35 feet
      (2)   Residential high-rise buildings:  according to the requirements of
Subsection
1151.01(b)
      (3)   Commercial buildings in R, CO-1 and CN-1 districts:  35 feet
      (4)   Commercial buildings in CC-2 and CI-1 districts:  35 feet
      (5)   Commercial and manufacturing buildings in all other districts:  not
applicable
      (6)   All buildings in the DMC district: according to the requirements of
Subsection
1151.01(b)
         (Ord. 06-91.  Passed 3-14-06.)
   (b)   For all buildings for which a height is required, the maximum height
may be increased, provided no portion of the building shall project through
imaginary planes leaning inward at a 24 degree angle from horizontal and
commencing 35 feet above ground level at the yard lines.  (See illustration
below.) This angle represents an increase of one (1) foot of height for each
two and one-quarter (2.25) feet of horizontal distance perpendicular to the lot
lines.  Where existing land abutting the lot is developed or preserved with
permanent open space (such as street right-of-way), the imaginary plane may
commence from the opposite side of the open space at ground level.  This
subsection need not apply to that side of a building along the boundary of
another district which permits buildings to be higher than 35 feet.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3847.jpg]
 
1151.02  HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   The following structures or parts thereof shall be exempt from the general
height limitations set forth above.
   (a)   In all districts, the following structures shall be exempt:
      (1)   Chimney or flue.
      (2)   Church spire.
      (3)   Cupola, dome, skylight or other similar roof protrusion not used as
habitable floor space.
      (4)   Electronic receiving antenna.
      (5)   Farm structure, including a barn, silo, storage bin or similar
structure when associated with a farm.
      (6)   Flag pole.
      (7)   Parapet or fire wall extending not more than three (3) feet above
the permitted height of the building.
      (8)   Pole, tower or similar structure necessary for essential services.
      (9)   Roof structure, including elevator bulkhead, stairway, ventilating
fan, cooling tower or similar necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenance
required to operate and maintain the building.
   (b)   In the C and I districts, the following structures shall be exempt:
      (1)   Radio and television tower.
      (2)   Storage tank.
 
 
 
TITLE FIVE - Accessory Use and Structural Requirements
Chap.
1152.   General Requirements.
Chap.
1153.   Off-Street Parking Requirements.
Chap.
1155.   Sign Requirements.
Chap.
1156.   Fence and Hedge Requirements.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1152
General Requirements
 
1152.01   Attached accessory buildings structures.
1152.02   Detached accessory buildings.
 
1152.01  ATTACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory buildings and structures attached to principal buildings shall be
located pursuant to the requirements for principal buildings of Title Four.
 
1152.02  DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   In all districts, except as specified in each district, accessory uses and
structures shall be subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   Time of construction.  No accessory building or use shall be
constructed or established prior to the start of construction of the principal
building or use to which it is accessory.
   (b)   Setback from property lines and location within yards.  Accessory
structures shall be separated from lot lines and located within yards in
compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   In R districts, an accessory building shall not be located closer
than five (5) feet to a rear or side lot line. (An accessory building may not
be located within a front yard.)  An accessory building may be located to
within three (3) feet of a rear or side lot line if the following conditions
are met:
         A.   Any projection from the building such as eaves shall be located
no less than three (3) feet from the rear or side lot line;
         B.   Exterior walls located closer than five (5) feet to a rear or
side lot line shall not have less than a one (1)-hour fire-resistive rating,
rated for exposure from both sides; and
         C.   No openings such as windows or doors shall be placed in the wall
or portions of walls located within five (5) feet of the rear or side lot line.
      (3)   An accessory structure for a zero lot line dwelling shall not be
located within the required 10 foot side yard.
      (4)   When a garage has access perpendicular to an alley as to require
backing directly into the alley, it shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
the alley.
         (Ord. 04-71.  Passed 3-9-04.)
   (c)   Location of accessory buildings and structures within specified yards.
The following buildings and structures may be located within the required yards
specified, subject to the special conditions indicated.
      (1)   Accessory buildings.  Accessory buildings may be located within a
side or rear yard, provided they shall comply with all other requirements of
this chapter.
      (2)   Canopy, gas pump island.  Unenclosed canopies over gas pump islands
may be located within the required front yard or side yard, provided at street
intersections, the supports shall not be located within a triangular area two
(2) of its sides 30 feet in length and measured along the curb lines (or
pavement edge where curbs do not exist) from the point of intersection.
      (3)   Dog runs.  Dog runs constructed solely for the purpose of confining
dogs for exercising and feeding may be located in any yard, provided that in an
R district, they shall not be located in the front yard or side yard nor closer
than five (5) feet to the rear lot line.
      (4)   Fences and hedges.  Fences and hedges may be located in any yard
subject to the requirements of Chapter
1156.
      (5)   Ornamental features. Light fixtures, flag poles, arbors, trellises,
fountains, sculptures, plant boxes, plants, trees, and other similar ornamental
features may be located within any yard.  However, at street intersections, no
ornamental feature more than two and one-half feet (2.5) feet in height above
the curb level shall be located within a triangular area two (2) of its sides
30 feet in length and measured along the curb lines (or pavement edge where
curbs do not exist) from the point of intersection.
      (6)   Parking, off-street.  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter
1153, open off-street parking may be located within any yard.
      (7)   Decks and stoops, uncovered.  Porches, balconies, decks and stoops
which are uncovered, may extend into any yard, provided that such projections
shall not extend into a front yard more than eight (8) feet.  Stoops may extend
into a side yard not more than two (2) feet.
      (8)   Signs.  Signs may only be located within a yard according to the
provisions of Chapter
1155.
      (9)   Swimming pools and hot tubs.  Swimming pools and hot tubs with a
depth of 18 inches or more may be located in any yard, provided that in an R
district they shall not be located in a front yard and shall not be located
closer than 10 feet to a side or rear lot line.
      (10)   Telephones, coin operated.  In C, M, and DMC districts, coin
operated telephones may be located within any yard.
      (11)   Windows.  Bay windows and similar projecting windows may extend
into any yard, provided in an R district, they shall not be closer than three
(3) feet to a side lot line.
      (12)   Skywalks.  In the DMC district, skywalks for pedestrian access
over private property and over public streets, when approved by the Department
of Community Development, may be located within any yard.
      (13)   Public Transportation Area.  In the DMC district, public
transportation areas may be located within any yard.
   (d)   Setback from principal building.  No accessory building shall be
located closer than six (6) feet to the principal building.
   (e)   Maximum rear yard coverage.  In R districts, accessory buildings shall
not occupy more than 25 percent of the rear yard.
   (f)   Maximum height.  The height of accessory structures shall not exceed
the following:
      (1)   In R districts, an accessory building or structure shall not exceed
a height of 16 feet, except for the following:
         A.   Electronic receiving antenna.
         B.   Public utility.
      (2)   In all districts except R districts and except for fences and
signs, an accessory structure may be of any height, provided it does not exceed
the height permitted for a principal building.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1153
Off-Street Parking Requirements
 
1153.01   General requirements.
1153.02   Number of parking spaces.
1153.03   Shared parking district.
1153.04   Construction, design, and location requirements.
1153.05   Parking for disabled persons.
1153.06   Special vehicle parking and storage.
1153.07   Restricted business or industrial accessory parking areas.
1153.08   Parking lot permit application.
 
1153.01  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general requirements shall govern the number, design and
location of off-street parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles whether
or not they are required:
   (a)   Where a fractional space results, the number of parking and stacking
spaces required shall be the closest whole number. If the fractional amount is
one half (1/2), the next lowest whole number shall be applied.
   (b)   Whenever a building or use which existed prior to the effective date
of this code is enlarged by one (1) or more additions to the extent of less
than fifty (50) percent of the floor area existing as of the date of adoption
of this code, the use or uses contained within the additions or enlargements
shall comply with the parking requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Whenever a building or use which existed prior to the effective date
of this code is enlarged by one (1) or more additions to the extent of more
than fifty (50) percent of the floor area existing as of the date of adoption
of this code, the uses contained within the original building and all
enlargements shall comply with the parking requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   For mixed uses, the required parking and stacking spaces shall equal
the sum of the required parking spaces for the various uses computed
separately.
   (e)   The storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, refuse containers,
obsolete or discarded vehicles or major repair of vehicles is prohibited in
required off-street parking and stacking spaces. Major repair of a vehicle
shall be construed as any repair, which immobilizes a vehicle for more than 48
hours.
   (f)   Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy as provided in Chapter
1311 of Part 13 (Building code), of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Springfield, Ohio, or the establishment of a use, all parking and stacking
spaces, drives and aisles shall be constructed according to the requirements of
this chapter. The Community Development Director or Director's designee may
issue a temporary Zoning Certificate in those instances where he/she finds that
the paving cannot be installed due to adverse weather conditions or settling of
the site after demolition or filling. A temporary Zoning Certificate shall be
effective only to a date specific.
   (g)   The property owner is responsible to maintain and replace, as
determined by the Community Development Director or the Director's designee,
landscaping required by the provisions of this chapter.
   (h)   Parking spaces may be provided either in a parking garage or open
area.
   (i)   Non-compliance with any section of this Chapter
1153 will result in code enforcement action and the property owner will be
subject to civil fines pursuant to Chapter
1324 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield, Ohio.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.02  NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES.
   In all districts, except the Unified Plan Overlay District or Eastern Edge
Corridor Plan Overlay District, there shall be provided prior to the occupation
of a building or commencement of a use the minimum number of off-street parking
and stacking spaces as indicated in the following tables. For properties
located in the Unified Plan Overlay District and Eastern Edge Corridor Plan
Overlay District, please refer to Chapter
1141 and Chapter
1142, respectively.
   (a)   Residential Uses.
 
 
Principal Use                           Number of Spaces
Family day-care home - type B           4 parking spaces
Mobile and modular home                 2 parking spaces per home
Multi-family dwelling, except high-rise 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit for up to
and elderly housing                     800 sq. ft.; 2 parking spaces per
                                        dwelling unit for over 800 sq. ft.
Multi-family dwelling - high-rise       1 parking space per dwelling unit
Multi-family dwelling - elderly housing 1 parking space per 4 dwelling units
Rooming house                           1 parking space per 200 apartment sq ft
                                        of floor area
Fraternity and sorority                 1 parking space per 2 residents
Single family dwelling and duplex       2 parking spaces per dwelling unit
Homeless shelter                        ¼ parking space per occupant load
 
   (b)   Commercial Uses.
 
 
Principal Use                           Number of Spaces
                                        1 parking space per service station
                                        island of pumps and service stall plus
                                        1 stacking space per 4 pumps and
Automobile gasoline and service station service stall. Parking spaces shall be
                                        provided in lieu of stacking spaces in
                                        instances where egress from a facility
                                        would require a motor vehicle waiting
                                        for entry to be moved.
Automobile repair garage                1.5 parking spaces per 500 sq ft of
                                        floor area
Beauty Parlor and/or Barber Shop        2 parking spaces per barber or beauty
                                        parlor chair
                                        Stacking spaces equal in number to 5
                                        times the maximum capacity of the car
                                        wash per wash rack (bay or tunnel) or 3
Car Wash                                times the maximum capacity for a coin
                                        operated car wash per wash rack; in
                                        addition, 1 parking space per 2 wash
                                        racks.
                                        1 parking space per 300 sq ft of floor
                                        area. For drive-in establishments, an
                                        additional 6 stacking spaces per
Financial Institution                   external teller or customer service
                                        window designed for drive-in service
                                        shall be provided but need not exceed
                                        18 total stacking spaces
Funeral home                            1 parking space per 4 seats
Furniture, major appliance, and floor   1 parking space per 500 sq ft of floor
covering store                          area
Grocery Store/Supermarket               1 parking space per 300 sq ft of floor
                                        area
Hotel and motel                         1.15 parking spaces for guest room
Laundry/dry cleaning establishment      1 parking space per 2 laundry and dry
(self-service)                          cleaning machines
                                        1 parking space per 500 sq ft of floor
                                        area. For drive-in establishment, an
Laundry/dry cleaning establishment      additional 2 stacking spaces per
(full-service)                          external teller or customer service
                                        window designed for drive-in service
                                        shall be provided.
Machinery sales                         1 parking space per 800 sq ft of floor
                                        area
Motor vehicle sales and rental          1 parking space per 800 sq ft of floor
                                        area
Office                                  1 parking spaces per 350 sq ft of floor
                                        area
                                        1.5 parking space per office, examining
Office - Medical                        and treatment room, provided there
                                        shall not be less than 5 spaces
Personal service establishment - other  1 parking space per 300 sq ft of floor
than listed                             area
                                        2 parking spaces per office, studio,
Photographic studio                     and reception area, provided there
                                        shall not be less than 5 spaces
Rental agency - equipment and supplies  1 parking space per 500 sq ft of
                                        interior and exterior storage area
Restaurant and establishment dispensing
food or beverage for consumption on the 1 parking space per 4 seats
premises
                                        1 parking space per 4 seats, but not
                                        less than 5 spaces, plus 6 stacking
Restaurants - drive-in and carry-out    spaces per external teller or customer
                                        service window designed for drive-in
                                        service
Retail store - 0 - 60,000 square feet   3 parking spaces per 1000 sq ft of
                                        floor area
Retail store - more than 60,000 square  2 parking spaces per 1000 sq ft of
feet                                    floor area
Studio and station (radio/television)   1 parking space per 400 sq ft of floor
                                        area
 
   (c)   Manufacturing Uses.
 
 
Principal Use                           Number of Spaces
                                        The sum total of parking spaces shall
                                        be determined on the basis of the
Contractor and construction yard        parking spaces required for uses
                                        individually such as office area and
                                        warehouse space
                                        The sum total of parking spaces shall
                                        be determined on the basis of the
Junk Yard                               parking spaces required for uses
                                        individually such as office area and
                                        garage space
Laboratory - research, development and  1 parking space per 600 sq ft of floor
testing                                 area
Manufacturing or establishments engaged
in production, processing packing and   1 parking space per 600 sq ft of floor
crating, cleaning, servicing or repair  area
of materials, goods, or products.
Motor and railroad freight terminal -   1 parking space per 800 sq ft of floor
cartage, express and parcel delivery    area
Printing and publishing establishment   1 parking space per 300 sq ft of floor
                                        area
Warehouse - less than 25,000 square     1 parking space per 1,000 sq ft to a
feet                                    maximum of 5
Warehouse - more than 25,000 square     5 parking spaces plus 1 additional
feet                                    parking space per 5,000 sq ft above
                                        25,000 sq ft
 
   (d)   Institutional Uses.
 
 
Principal Use                          Number of Spaces
Home - children's, aged, convalescent, For a group care facility and children's
rest and nursing home, and group care  home, 1.5 parking spaces per 2
facility                               occupants. For other uses, 1 parking
                                       space per 3 beds
Hospital - sanitarium and asylum       1 ¾ parking spaces per hospital bed
School - generalized instruction,
elementary and junior high, and        2 parking spaces per public or private
specialized public or private          classroom
instruction
School - generalized instruction,      10 parking spaces per public and private
senior high                            classroom
Daycare Center, adult or child         1 parking space per 6 clients (children
                                       or adults)
 
   (e)   Places of assembly, worship, recreation, entertainment and/or
amusement.
 
 
Principal Use  Number of Spaces
Bowling Center 4 parking spaces per lane
Club and lodge Parking spaces equal in number to 1/3 of the occupant load of the
               largest room in the building
Establishments
or enterprises
of a
recreational
or an
entertainment  Parking spaces equal in number to ¼ the occupant load in the seating
nature -       area
spectator type
(auditorium,
sports arena,
theater,
stadium and
meeting hall)
Establishments
or enterprises
of a
recreational
or an
entertainment
nature -       Parking spaces equal in number to 2/3 the occupant load of the area
participating  used for the participatory sport or activity. For outdoor activities,
type (skating  the number of parking spaces shall be based upon the maximum number
rink, dance    of persons the facility can or is expected to accommodate
hall, tennis
court,
swimming pool,
archery range,
gymnasium,
pool hall)
Golf course    3 parking spaces per hole
Golf driving   1 parking space for each 20 ft of range width
range
Library,
museum and art 1 parking space per 300 sq ft of floor area
gallery
Religious
institution    Parking spaces equal in number to 1/6 the occupant load of the main
and community  auditorium or the largest room in the building, which ever is greater
center
 
   (f)   Other Uses.  For uses not listed, parking spaces shall be provided on
the same basis as required for the most similar listed use as determined by the
Community Development Director or his/her designee.
   (g)   Parking Reduction. A lawful use can receive a reduction of five (5)
percent of required parking spaces for permanently retaining onsite the first
quarter (1/4) inch of every storm event.  Every additional quarter inch (1/4)
retained onsite per storm event will result in an additional reduction of five
(5) percent of the required parking spaces up to a maximum of twenty (20)
percent of the total number of required parking spaces.  Practices used to
retain stormwater onsite may also be used to satisfy the stormwater management
requirements in Codified Ordinance
961.  Examples of stormwater retention practices include, but are not limited
to infiltration, evaporation, transpiration, canopy interception, rainwater
harvesting, extended infiltration, and other practices that retain stormwater.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.03  SHARED PARKING.
   If, due to practical difficulties, a parcel cannot provide a sufficient
number of off-street parking spaces, off-street parking spaces on other parcels
may be counted under the following conditions:
   (a)   The applicant's proposed use and the current use of the other property
are conducted in predominantly different time periods (i.e. a theater and a
bank).
   (b)   A shared parking agreement is provided that:
      (1)   Is signed by the applicant and the owner of the other property
(both properties may be in same ownership),
      (2)   Is for a minimum period of three (3) years,
      (3)   Provides for notice to the City at least thirty (30) days prior to
termination.
   (c)   The shared parking agreement can account for no more than fifty (50)
percent of the number of spaces required for the applicant's proposed use
except that if the proposed use is for a religious institution, the shared
parking agreement can account for one hundred (100) percent of the number of
required spaces, or the shared parking agreement can account for one hundred
(100) percent of the number of required spaces if the two (2) properties share
the same ownership and the parcel containing the shared parking area is only
being utilized for parking.
   (d)   The shared parking shall be in the same zoning district as the
applicant's proposed use, or a zoning district that also allows the applicant's
proposed use, or a zoning district that allows commercial parking lots as a
principal use.
   (e)   The applicant's proposed use and the parcel containing the shared
parking shall be no further apart than three hundred (300) feet if the proposed
use is a commercial or residential use, or five hundred (500) feet if the
proposed use is a manufacturing use.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.04  CONSTRUCTION, DESIGN, AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall govern the construction, design and
location of off-street parking spaces, stacking spaces, drives and aisles.
   (a)   Construction. Except for as provided in
1153.06 (2)(b), all parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles shall be
constructed of Asphalt, Concrete, Brick/Block (Permeable) Pavers, Grass Pavers/
Porous Pavement or Pervious Concrete.
   (b)   Design. Except for single-family dwellings (including zero lot line
and townhouse units) and duplexes, parking, stacking spaces, aisles, and drives
shall be designed as follows:
      (1)   Parking areas shall be provided with the minimum dimensions
illustrated in Table 1. An approved use can provide up to twenty (20) percent
of its required parking spaces as compact car spaces.
 
 
TABLE 1
                                                90  60   45   30   0
Width Parallel to Aisle (ft):    Standard Spac9s  11.4 12.7 17.6 24
            Compact Spaces           8   9.3  11.4 16   22
Length at 90  (ft):       Standard Spaces 18  20   19   15.5 9
            Compact Spaces           15  17   16   14   8
Minimum Width of Aisle (ft)                      24  18   13   12   14
One-Way Traffic
Minimum Width of Aisle (ft)                      24  22   22   22   22
Two-Way Traffic
Module Width parallel to :
Single row parking (ft)                          42  38   32   27.5 23
Double row parking (ft)                          60  58   51   43   32
Double row parking with single interlock (ft)    N/A 56   47.5 39.6 N/A
Double row parking with double interlock (ft)    N/A 54   43.5 36.2 N/A
 
      (2)   All parking spaces shall be connected to an aisle, which shall have
the minimum width indicated in Table 1.
      (3)   When different parking space configurations abut the same aisle,
the greatest aisle width shown in Table 1 shall be provided.
      (4)   Parking spaces shall be designed to permit ingress and egress of a
vehicle to and from a parking space without moving any other vehicle occupying
a parking space except for single-family dwellings (including zero lot line and
townhouse units) and duplexes.
      (5)   No parking area shall be so designed in such a manner that exiting
a parking space would require backing into a street or alley.
      (6)   Parking areas with spaces along lot lines and alleys shall be
provided with car stops or curbing so no part of a parked vehicle can extend
beyond a lot line or into an alley.
      (7)   Traffic islands shall be located so that parking spaces are
separated from drives.
      (8)   In parking areas, all parking and stacking spaces, drives and
aisles shall be pitched or curbed and drained in such a manner as to prevent
the flow of excess water from such areas onto adjoining property or into
streets and alleys which do not have adequate drainage facilities. The adequacy
of drainage facilities as well as compliance with the stormwater regulations of
Chapter
961 of Part Nine of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio, shall be
determined by the City Engineer or Engineer's designee.
      (9)   In all parking areas, parking spaces shall be visibly delineated on
the surface by painted or marked stripes.
      (10)   If two (2) or more parking areas are connected by a drive, the
parking areas shall be designed so that an aisle connected to more than twelve
(12) parking spaces is not used as a drive in providing access to another
parking area.
      (11)   A drive providing access to a parking area shall be at least ten
(10) feet in width for a one-way drive and no less than eighteen (18) feet in
width if it is used for two-way traffic.
      (12)   Where a parking area is provided within fifty (50) feet on the
same side of the street as a lot in an RS district, the lot shall be screened
from view of that portion of the parking area within fifty (50) feet.
      (13)   Where a parking area is provided on a lot within 150 feet across
the street from an RS district, the lot shall be screened from view of that
portion of the parking area within 150 feet.
      (14)   The materials for screening and their placement shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection
1161.02(h) titled Performance Standards.
      (15)   Trees shall be located so every parking space or portion of a
parking space is not more than fifty (50) feet from a tree. Trees utilized in
parking areas shall be designated on the construction drawings. The varieties
and sizes of trees permitted are specified in the list of Recommended Trees for
Springfield, Ohio (as provided by the City Forestry Division). Trees not
included on the list may be used to fulfill the requirements of this chapter
upon approval of the City Forestry Division.
      (16)   Developments requiring more than four (4) trees must use at least
two (2) or more species of trees.
      (17)   All trees shall be placed within planting areas of pervious
material suitable for growth of a tree and separated from parking spaces,
drives and aisles by a continuous curb or barrier a minimum of five (5) inches
in height and/or a depressed planting area engineered to accept and infiltrate
stormwater and separated from parking spaces, drives and aisles by a cut curb
or other practice that will deter traffic from entering the planting area. All
depressed area designs shall be detailed in the construction drawings and be
approved by the City Engineer or Engineer's designee.
      (18)   Planting areas shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet for
each small tree and 160 square feet for each medium and large tree.
      (19)   Trees shall be located a minimum of four (4) feet from the edge of
planting area or right-of-way line.
      (20)   When a parking area is provided within twenty (20) feet of any
street, a landscape border not less than four (4) feet in width is required
between the parking area and the street. The landscape border may be broken for
necessary walkways, driveways, and sight distance areas. Such landscaping shall
contain a combination of trees (40 feet on center) and shrubs (4 feet on
center) making at least a three (3) feet high visual barrier during the summer
months, at plant maturity. A wall or fence can be placed in the landscape
border strip (see Section
1156.01), as can a berm. Hedges and other landscape-screening materials (except
trees) cannot exceed four (4) feet in height. Parking lots located in the
Unified Plan Overlay District (Chapter
1141) and Eastern Edge Corridor Overlay District (Chapter
1142) shall comply with the provisions established in each respective Chapters
of the code.
      (21)   Compact car stall dimensions shall be provided per Table 1. All
compact car spaces shall be marked as designated on the approved construction
plans.
      (22)   When the number of parking spaces provided exceeds the minimum
required in Section
1153.02 of this ordinance by fifteen (15) percent or more, the developer shall
permanently retain onsite the first quarter (1/4) inch of every storm event.
   (c)   Design for single-family dwellings (including zero lot line and
townhouse units) and duplexes:
      (1)   Drives and parking spaces can be provided as a two-track
"Hollywood" design with a width of eighteen (18) inches per wheel track. Tire
base of vehicles parked or stored on Hollywood drive must be accommodated by
the two-track design.
   (d)   Location. Parking spaces, stacking spaces, aisles and drives shall be
located as follows:
      (1)   General.
         A.   Off-Street parking and stacking spaces, aisles, and drives shall
be located on the same lot as the use served except as provided in Section
1153.03.
         B.   Drives and aisles in all R districts and in all other districts
abutting an R district, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to a
lot line except for single-family dwellings (including zero lot line and
townhouse units) and duplexes.
         C.   A parking area shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to
a lot with a single-family residence or duplex in other R districts.
      (2)   Front Yard.
         A.   Except as provided in paragraph B and C below, no parking or
storage space in an R district and in the C and M districts within fifty (50)
feet of an R district along the same frontage shall be permitted within a front
yard.
         B.   For detached single-family dwellings in the R districts, two (2)
of the required parking spaces may be provided within a front yard on a
regularly constructed drive, provided not less than fifty (50) percent of the
front yard shall remain in open space free of impervious surface.
         C.   For zero lot line dwellings, duplexes, and family care
facilities, only two (2) of the required parking spaces may be provided within
the front yard on a regularly constructed drive, provided not less than fifty
(50) percent of the front yard shall remain in open space free of impervious
surface.
      (3)   Rear Yard.
         A.   Parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles may be located
within a rear yard.
            (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.05  PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
   Parking for disabled persons must be provided in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.06  SPECIAL VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   Except as permitted below, a special vehicle may be parked and stored on a
lot in an R District but only upon meeting the following requirements:
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Definitions.  The following definitions shall be applicable to this
section.
         A.   Special vehicle.  A vehicle more than seven and one-half (7 1/2)
feet in height or more than twenty (20) feet in length which is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, street or body of water.  Such vehicles
include but are not limited to a truck, trailer, tractor, wagon, or watercraft
exceeding these dimensions.  Such vehicles do not include temporary
construction trailers when associated with an active construction project on
the premises.
         B.   Storage area.  A space used for storage of a special vehicle and
at least equal in size to the outer perimeter of the special vehicle.
   (b)   In RS-5, RS-8, and RM-12 districts special vehicles may be stored on a
well-maintained gravel pad in the rear yard that is a minimum of five (5) feet
from side and rear yard property lines.
   (c)   Except for the purpose of making local deliveries, no special vehicle
designed for the shipment of detonable materials and explosives; flammable/
combustible solids, liquids or gasses; nor hazardous materials as defined by
the Ohio Department of Transportation shall be parked or stored on any lot in
an R district.
   (d)   Special vehicles used for commercial purposes shall not be stored in
any R district except the RM-44A district.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.07  RESTRICTED BUSINESS OR MANUFACTURING ACCESSORY PARKING AREAS.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, as a conditional use, the
establish-ment of a restricted accessory parking area in such parts of
residential districts as abut directly or across an alley from any existing
commercial structure, or as abut directly or across an alley or street from any
existing industrial structure, subject to the provisions of this section.
   (a)   The parking area shall be accessory to and for use in connection with
one (1) or more businesses or industrial establishments located as noted above.
   (b)   Any portion of any entrance to or exit from such parking area shall be
at least twenty (20) feet from any adjacent lot line located in an RS district
and shall be located not more than ninety (90) feet from the property it is
intended to serve.
   (c)   The parking area shall not be closer to any street right-of-way line
than the front yard requirement for a principal building as required in the
district in which such parking areas are located.
   (d)   The parking area must meet the screening requirements of Subsection
1161.02(h).  No advertising shall be allowed on the above-described screening.
   (e)   The design and location of entrances, exits, and surface drainage
shall be subject to all laws and ordinances pertaining thereto and subject to
the approval of the City Engineer or Engineer's designee.
   (f)   No sign of any kind shall be maintained on the lot other than to
designate exits, entrances, and conditions of use, which signs shall be no
larger than four (4) square feet.
   (g)   The parking area shall be for the use of parking passenger vehicles
only and no fee shall be charged.
   (h)   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking areas shall be
so located and oriented so as to reflect the light away from adjoining lots
located in any R district.
   (i)   Any such application approved by the Board may be revoked after public
hearing at any time that the aforementioned requirements are not met.  If
parking rights are revoked by the Board for noncompliance with the requirements
established by this section or by the Board, the lot area shall no longer be
used for private parking.
   (j)   All applicants desiring to establish business or industrial parking
within the meaning of this section shall submit to the Board a plan which
clearly indicates the proposed development, including the location and
arrangement of the parking area dimensions, all entrances and exits,
landscaping, location, and method of screening, sign locations, and sizes.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1153.08  PARKING LOT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The construction of new and/or modified parking lot areas, except those
associated with new development projects, shall require the submission of a
parking lot permit application for approval by the Community Development
Director or Director's designee. The application shall include the following:
   (a)   Parking Lot Permit Application Form
   (b)   Proof of Ownership or Ownership Affidavit
   (c)   Site Plan that includes the number of parking spaces with landscaping
and drive/ aisle area to scale
   (d)   Stormwater Management Plan and Report (Includes Stormwater
Calculations (Refer to Chapter
961 of the Springfield Codified Ordinances)
   (e)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) required for sites that
disturb one (1) acre or more
   (f)   Notice of Intent (NOI) from Ohio EPA for sites that disturb one (1)
acre or more
   (g)   Application Fee = $150, plus $1.00 per parking space. (Additional
review fees apply if more than one (1) acre of land is disturbed - see Chapter
961)
If the Director or Director's Designee determines that the proposed parking lot
meets the applicable requirements of this Chapter the Director or Director's
Designee shall issue a parking lot permit.
Upon approval of the parking lot permit application the owner/developer has six
(6) months to complete the construction of the new commercial parking area. The
owner/developer shall notify the Community Development Director or the
Director's designee of the completion of construction activities. At that time
the Community Development Director or Director's designee and the City Engineer
or the Engineer's designee will inspect the lot and determine whether it
conforms to the approved plans. If the commercial parking area construction has
been approved, the Community Development Director or Director's designee will
issue a certificate of completion to the owner/developer of the commercial
parking area.
(Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1155
Sign Requirements
 
1155.01   Purpose; signs regulated.
1155.02   Definitions.
1155.03   Signs not requiring a permit.
1155.04   Specific signs requiring a permit.
1155.05   Prohibited signs.
1155.06   Signs permitted by sign district.
1155.07   Additional regulations.
1155.08   License and permit requirements.
1155.09   Construction, maintenance, and abandonment requirements.
Map   Legend Sign Type
Tables
 
1155.01  PURPOSE; SIGNS REGULATED.
   (a)   It is the purpose of the sign regulations to enhance and protect the
physical appearance and safety of the community, to protect property values and
to promote the preservation of Springfield's areas of natural, historic and
scenic beauty.  It is further intended to reduce distractions and obstructions
that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by
signs projecting over public rights of way, provide for a reasonable
opportunity for all sign users to display their messages without interference
from other signage, and to provide for fair and equitable treatment of all sign
users. This code addresses the current advertising, communication, and
identification trends and needs of sign owners, sign viewers, and the
community. This sign code is intended to protect public health, safety, and
welfare and be consistent with applicable legal requirements. These regulations
are intended to reduce visual clutter, unsafe distractions to the traveling
public, and provide visual organization of sign structures by arranging sign
types into approved sign districts that order property by context, land use,
and thoroughfare characteristics.     
 
   (b)   No sign shall be erected or altered in any manner without compliance
with the regulations stated herein.
 
   (c)   These regulations are structured within the two general categories of
temporary and permanent signs. Temporary signs are governed by the provisions
of Subsection
1155.08(e) and are permitted in addition to permanent signs permitted under
this Chapter.  Permanent signs may be either off premises or on premises
signs.  Off premises signs are governed by the provisions of Subsection
1155.04(a)(6).  All on premises signs are governed by the regulations of the
sign district in which they are located.
(Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of these
sign requirements.  The definitions contained in Chapter 1102 of this Code
shall apply to all terms not defined in this chapter.
   (a)   (1)   Abandoned Sign.  A sign which continues to be in a state of
structural, mechanical, and or general disrepair and in violation of the
Property Maintenance Code, Chapter
1305 for a period of 60 consecutive days after the City has notified the owner
of the sign that the sign is in a state of structural, mechanical, and or
general disrepair and in violation of the Property Maintenance Code, Chapter
1305.
      (2)   Alteration.  Any change to a sign that does not constitute repair.
      (3)    Animated sign.  A sign depicting action or motion through
electrical or mechanical means.
      (4)   Architectural detailing. Any construction appertaining to but not
being an integral part of the sign, consisting of landscape or structural
features that embellish the site in general.  Architectural detailing includes,
but is not limited to, aesthetic embellishments such as flower plantings, wood
carving, wrought or cast iron ornamentation, stone or brick ornamentation, or
metal work decoration.
      (5)   Awning sign. A building sign place on the surface of an awning.
(See graphic example below. Source: United States Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3888.jpg]
 
   (b)   (1)   Balloon.  An inflatable bag filled with gas and displayed in
such a way as to attract attention to the premises on which it is located.
      (2)   Banner.  A sign on a strip of flexible material such as cloth,
paper or plastic.
      (3)   Bench Billboard.  An off-premise sign on which poster panels,
bulletins, and/or copy are mounted and which is designed to function and appear
like a bench for seating.
      (4)   Billboard.  An off premises sign on which poster panels or
bulletins are mounted.
      (5)   Building sign.  Any sign which is in any way attached to a building
or to an appurtenance of a building; excluding signs inside the building and
banners.
   (c)   (1)   Canopy sign.  A building sign attached to or in any way
incorporated with the face or underside of a canopy, marquee, or any other
similar building projection. (See graphic example below, Source: United States
Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3891.jpg]
 
      (2)   Common sign.  A sign which serves two or more uses. (See graphic
example below, Source: United States Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3894.jpg]
 
      (3)   Construction sign.  A sign pertaining to the construction
activities performed on a construction site and/or announcing the future use of
the structure which is the subject of construction activities.
   (d)   (1)   Development sign.  A sign identifying a large scale residential
development.
      (2)   Digital Dynamic Display Sign (Single Color). A sign whose
informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display surface
composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable
elements. These signs display text and/or graphics in a single color on a black
background. These signs may be capable of displaying more than one color, but
only display a single color at a time. These signs are illuminated signs.
      (3)   Digital Dynamic Display Sign (Multi Color). A sign whose
informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display surface
composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable
elements. These signs display text and/or graphics and utilize multiple colors.
These signs are illuminated signs.
      (4)   Directional sign.  A sign exclusively for the purpose of giving
directions to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (e)    Reserved.
   (f)   (1)   Fascia sign.  A single faced building sign that is mounted on
exterior wall of a building.
      (2)   Flag, public.  A public flag is any flag displaying the name,
insignia, emblem or logo of the United States, the State of Ohio, the City or
the flag of any other government.
      (3)   Free standing sign.  A sign which is supported by one or more up
rights or braces which are anchored in or on the ground, and which is not
attached to any building or wall. (See graphic example below, Source: United
States Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3897.jpg]
 
   (g)   Reserved
   (h)   (1)   Hazardous sign.  A sign which, because of its construction or
state of disrepair may fall or cause possible injury to passers by, as
determined by the Building Official; a sign which because of its location,
color, illumination or animation, interferes with, obstructs the view of or is
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device or interferes with,
misleads, or confuses traffic.
      (2)   Home Occupation Sign.  A fascia sign mounted on a residential
building and advertising a home occupation conducted from the lot on which the
residential building is located.
   (i)   (1)   Illuminated sign.  A sign in which a source of light other than
sunlight is used to make the message readable.
      (2)   Institutional sign.  A sign for a religious institution,
educational institution, library, community center,  civic,  cultural or
historic institution, nursing home, hospital or similar institution and the
announcement of its service or activities.
      (3)   Integral sign.  A sign carved into stone, concrete or other
building material, or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of
construction and made a part of the structure into which it is incorporated.
   (j)   Reserved
   (k)   Reserved
   (l)   (1)   Large scale residential development.  A residential subdivision
consisting of 10 acres or more or a development consisting of more than 29
dwelling units on a separate tract of two acres or more.
   (m)   (1)    Monument sign.  There are three different types of monument
signs described in this code, as follows:
      (2)   Monument sign (Traditional): A sign which is mounted on a structure
with an open area below the sign face that is less than 50% of the total height
of the sign. (See graphic example below, Source: United States Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3900.jpg]
 
      (3)   Monument sign (Foundation): A sign permanently mounted or appearing
to be mounted on a footer in the ground along its full length and is less than
10 feet in height. (See graphic example below, Source: United States Sign
Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3903.jpg]
 
      (4)   Monument sign (Monolith): A sign permanently mounted or appearing
to be mounted on a footer in the ground along its full length and is more than
10 feet in height. (See graphic example below, Source: United States Sign
Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3906.jpg]
 
       (n)   (1)   Non conforming sign.  A sign, other than a prohibited sign,
that does not comply with the regulations of the sign district in which it is
located by reason of these or any other regulations adopted after the erection
of the sign.
      (2)   Nit. The unit of measurement for the total amount of light emitted,
or luminance, from a sign divided by the surface area of the sign (candelas per
square meter (cd/m²)). The "International System of Units" unit for luminance
is candela per square metre (cd/m2). The common term for the same unit is the
"nit". Luminance is used in the video industry to characterize the brightness
of displays.
   (o)   (1)   Off premises sign.  A sign which directs attention to an off-
site use or to products or services sold elsewhere. 
      (2)   On premises sign.  A sign which directs attention to a use
conducted on the lot on which the sign is located.
   (p)   (1)   Painted sign.  A sign painted directly on an exterior surface of
a building, other than on a window.
      (2)   Permitted sign.  A sign which is allowed in the sign district in
which it is listed, subject to compliance with the requirements of the sign
requirements.
      (3)   Portable sign.  A sign that is not designed to be anchored or
secured to either a building or the ground.
      (4)   Prohibited sign.  A sign which are forbidden to be erected or
displayed.
      (5)   Projecting Sign. Any sign that is attached to a building wall and
that extends away from (i.e., is not parallel to) the building wall, or any
sign that is attached to a building wall and is parallel to the building wall
but suspended more than six inches from the building wall, or any sign
suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee, intended to be viewed by
pedestrians from the sidewalk beneath the canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.  A
sign suspended beneath a canopy or a marquee near the traveled portion of the
street is also a projecting sign though its message may not be visible to a
pedestrian from the sidewalk. (See graphic example below, Source: United States
Sign Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3909.jpg]
 
      (6)   Provisional sign.  A sign which is permitted in a sign district
under certain circumstances.
      (7)   Public art.  Any work of art exposed to public view from any street
right of way for the enjoyment of the public.
      (8)   Public sign.  A sign of a non commercial nature and in the public
interest erected by or upon the order or authorization of the City or other
public agency.  The term "public sign" includes but is not limited to a safety
sign, zoning sign, memorial plaque, sign for structures or sites of historical
interest.
   (q)   Reserved.
   (r)   (1)   Real estate sign.  A sign pertaining to the sale, the rental or
lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is located.
      (2)   Roof.  A roof is the outside surface of a building which is
constructed at an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees from the
horizontal plane.  The outside surface of a building which is constructed at an
angle of forty-five (45) degrees or more from the horizontal plane is a wall
and not a roof.
      (3)   Roof sign.  A sign erected upon or above a roof of a building and
affixed to the roof. (See graphic example below, Source: United States Sign
Council)
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3912.jpg]
 
   (s)    (1)   Seasonal decoration.  A display pertaining to celebration of a
religious or cultural holiday or commemoration of a historic event or
personage, observed during a particular season of the year.  A seasonal
decoration is not a sign.
      (2)   Sign.  Any communication, which is visible to the public from a
street or public right of way, using graphics, symbols, reading matter,
letters, numerals, pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks,
inscriptions, color, illumination, geometric or non-geometric shapes or
planes.  The term "sign" does not include public art, sculptured landscaping,
seasonal decorations, public flags, directional symbols on paved surfaces or
messages painted on or otherwise permanently attached to the body of a motor
vehicle or a trailer designed to transport freight.
      (3)   Sign face.  The surface of the sign upon which is affixed reading
material, letters, numerals, pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks,
inscriptions and/or patterns.
      (4)   Sign leg.  A sign supporting structure designed to rest upon the
ground to support the sign  rather than being imbedded in the ground.
      (5)   Sign wall.  The wall of a building upon which a sign is mounted and
which has a slope of forty-five (45) degrees or greater from the horizontal
plane.  See the definition of  "roof."
      (6)   Spinner.  A device shaped in a form similar to a propeller and
designed to rotate in the wind to attract attention to the premises on which it
is located.
      (7)   Swinging sign.  A sign which, because of its design, construction,
suspension or attachment is free to swing or move noticeably because of
pressure from the wind.
   (t)   (1)   Temporary sign.  A nonpermanent sign not permanently affixed to
the ground or a building. Banners, portable signs, trailer signs, and other
similar nonpermanent signs are regulated as temporary signs.
      (2)   Trailer Sign.  A sign mounted on wheels or sign legs.  All trailer
signs are temporary signs and are permitted and regulated as temporary signs.
   (u)   (1)   Use.  For the purpose of the sign requirements, use shall mean a
principal use as defined in this code.
   (v)   Reserved.
   (w)   (1)   Window sign.  A building sign permanently affixed to a window,
embedded in a window intended to communicate its message to passersby from the
outside.  The term "window sign" does not include merchandise or product
displays, posters, and other signs located inside the building though visible
through a window.
   (x)   Reserved.
   (y)   (1)   Yard sale sign.  A temporary sign for a yard sale or a garage
sale.
   (z)   Reserved.
      (Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.03  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   The following signs may be erected without a permit in addition to the
signage allowed in each sign district.  These signs shall not be applied toward
the maximum sign area allowance specified in the districts, except as otherwise
indicated in this subsection.
   (a)   Construction signs.  Non illuminated construction signs not to exceed
a total of 12 square feet, six square feet per sign face (for a double faced
sign) in Residential Sign Districts and residentially zoned area and a total of
64 square feet, 32 square feet per sign face (for a double faced sign) in other
sign districts, shall be permitted for each lot.  Such signs shall not exceed a
height of five feet in a residential sign districts or 10 feet in other
districts nor be closer than five feet to any property line unless located on
the wall of a building, fence or protective barricade surrounding the
construction.  Construction signs shall be removed prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
   (b)   Portable signs attached to or being held by a natural person.
   (c)   Window signage not exceeding a maximum area of two square feet.
   (d)     Public signs
   (e)     Real estate sign.  One non illuminated real estate sign not to
exceed twelve square feet, six square feet per sign face (for a double faced
sign), in residential districts or sixty-four square feet, thirty-two square
feet per sign face (for a double faced sign), in other districts, shall be
permitted on each lot.  Such signs shall not exceed a height of five feet in
residential districts, 10 feet in other districts, nor be closer than five feet
to any property line unless located on the wall of a building or fence.  Such
signs shall be removed within five days after the sale or lease of the
property.
   (f)   Posters and other non permanent signs inside a building and showing
through windows which are not window signs.
   (g)   Yard sale signs located on the site of the sale; not to exceed a
maximum number of two signs and a maximum area of four square feet for each
sign.
   (h)   A street address: The figures of such number shall be not less than
three inches in length and shall be painted or shall be made of metal,
porcelain or other durable material.
   (i)   Signs, other than real estate signs, construction signs, monument
signs, development signs, building signs and yard sale signs, which are erected
on property used for residential purposes by the owners or occupants of such
property; excepting, development signs and signs constructed with a sign board
exceeding six square feet.
      (Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.04  SPECIFIC SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT. 
   The following specific signs may be erected in accordance with the
requirements of Section
1155.06.  These signs shall be applied toward the maximum sign area allowance
specified in each sign district, except as otherwise indicated in this
subsection.
   (a)   Development sign.  One foundation monument sign in Residential
District or residentially zoned lots shall be permitted at each street entrance
to a large scale residential development; provided the following requirements
are met:
      1.   The sign shall not exceed a total area of forty square feet, twenty
square feet per sign face (for a double faced sign), nor a height of six feet. 
Architectural features of the sign shall not be included in calculating the
sign area.
      2.   The distance between two development signs shall be no less than 150
feet as measured along the frontage of the lot.
      3.   The sign shall not be located closer than 25 feet to a street right
of way line.
      4.   The area of a development sign may be increased by one square foot
for every linear foot it is setback in excess of 25 feet.
   (b)   Directional signs. 
      1.   Such signs shall not exceed a total of four square feet or two
square feet per sign face (for a double faced sign) in Residential District or
residentially zoned lots, or a total of six square feet, three square feet per
sign face (for a double faced sign), in all others.
      2.   Larger directional signage may be permitted with a conditional use
permit.
   (c)   Institutional sign.  A foundation monument institutional sign shall be
permitted for uses listed in section
1155.02 (i) (2) Institutional sign shalls not exceed a total of 48 square feet,
24 square feet per sign face (for a double faced sign), shall be permitted for
each institution.  Not more than one institutional sign may be permitted along
each street providing access to the institution.  No institutional sign shall
exceed a height of five feet above grade. Architectural features of the sign
shall not be included in calculating the sign area. The area of a institutional
sign may be increased by one square foot for every linear foot it is setback in
excess of 25 feet.
   (d)     Integral signs. Integral signs existing prior to the adoption of
these regulations shall not be applied toward the maximum sign area allowance
for the building into which they are incorporated.
   (e)   Additional real estate sign.  In addition to the real estate signs
described in this subsection, a nonresidential subdivision or development of
greater than two acres in size may display not more than one additional, non
illuminated real estate sign.  Such sign shall not exceed a total of 64 square
feet or 32 square feet per sign face for a double faced sign, nor a height of
six feet and shall be removed upon the sale or lease of ninety-five percent of
the lots or units in the subdivision or development.  Such signs shall not be
applied toward the maximum signage allowance specified in each sign district.
   (f)   Off-premises signs.
      1.   Off-premises signs shall not be permitted in Residential, Mixed
Neighborhood, and Downtown sign districts.  Off-premises signs may be
constructed as billboard signs or any other type of sign allowed in the sign
district in which the sign is located.
      2.   Not more than one off-premises sign may be erected or maintained per
lot.  Two or more uses may erect a common off-premises directional sign.  No
off-premises sign shall be erected closer than 300 feet to another off-premises
sign.
      3.   No off-premises sign shall be located on or within 200 feet of a
Residential District or residentially zoned lot, a public parking area, school,
religious institution, cemetery, public museum, or the administrative,
legislative, or judicial offices of government institutions.
      4.   An off-premises sign shall be permitted in addition to the on-
premises signage permitted on a lot.  However, the area of the off-premises
sign shall be deducted from the total sign area allowed for the same type of
on-premises sign.
      5.   Off-premises billboard signs shall not exceed a height of 35 feet
above the height of the nearest street grade.
      6.   With the exception of bench billboards which are regulated under
subdivision J, below, all off-premises billboard signs shall be permitted a
maximum area of 144 square feet or 72 square feet per sign face for a double-
faced sign; however, off-premises billboard signs must comply with Subsection
1155.04(f)(4) hereof.
      7.   Off-premises signs shall comply with all other sign requirements of
the sign district in which they are located.
      8.   Off-premises signs shall not be permitted in any OHP Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
      9.   Off-premises signs which otherwise comply with every other
applicable provision of this Zoning Code shall be specifically permitted upon
properties abutting any route within the City designated by the federal or
state governments, or National Road Ohio Scenic Byway Advisory Group, or any
like organization, as a "Scenic Byway." 
      10.   All bench billboards shall comply with the following:
         A.   Design Guidelines:
            i.   The length of the bench billboard shall not exceed six feet or
72 inches.
            ii.   The height of the bench billboard shall not exceed three and
on half feet or 42 inches from the ground.
            iii.   Bench billboards shall not weigh more than 250 pounds.
            iv.   Seats - seat boards shall consist of two inch by six inch
boards of metal, composite, or wood construction cut to appropriate lengths
and  sufficiently protected against weatherization. 
            v.   Copy face - the back of the bench upon which sign copy may be
attached may not exceed twelve square feet and is to be constructed of metal
and/or a minimum one-half inch plywood. Exterior grade paint must be used for
any painted surfaces. 
            vi.   Support legs - Support legs and required armrests are to be
constructed of concrete and/or metal.
            vii.   Armrests - Armrests shall be required on all bench
billboards exceeding 36 inches in length and shall be placed in the center and
ends of the bench.  Armrests are to be constructed of metal, concrete, or wood.
            viii.   The bench billboard must be placed on a continuous
permanent dust-free surface of sufficient size and composition to maintain the
stability of the bench billboard. Bench billboards shall rest completely within
the footprint of said surface.
            ix.   Bench billboards not firmly attached to the ground shall be
constructed so as to be able to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80
miles per hour without falling over or blowing away.
         B.   A property owner may allow a bench billboard to be placed on
private property subject to the following limitations:
            i.   A sign permit is required for each bench billboard. 
            ii.   No bench billboard is permitted to be located within the
public rights-of-way; except when the owner of the bench billboard has entered
into a contract with the City of Springfield for placement of bench billboards
upon public rights-of-way.
            iii.   Bench billboards to be placed on private property may be
permitted only for those locations meeting the criteria for off-premises signs
set forth in
1155.04(f) of this Zoning Code.
            iv.   Bench billboards shall be placed so as to not interfere with
or obstruct the clear vision of pedestrians and motorists to detract
approaching traffic at intersections; nor impeded the ability of pedestrians to
travel along public rights-of-way.
         C.   All benches shall be maintained in accordance with the City's
Property Maintenance Code, Chapter
1305. Any bench billboard which has fallen into such a state of disrepair or
has suffered such damage and wear so as to be not in compliance with the City's
Property Maintenance Code or is otherwise dangerous to use shall be promptly
and without delay removed or repaired.
         D.   Bench billboards shall be removed promptly and without delay from
locations when the sign permit for the bench billboard expires and no
immediately succeeding permit is obtained.
         E.   Bench billboards may be located within the public rights-of-way
only when the owner of the bench billboard has entered into a contract with the
City of Springfield authorizing placement of the bench billboard upon public
rights-of-ways.  And when such location meets these requirements: 
            i.   Bench billboards shall be placed on locations meeting the
criteria for off-premises signs set forth in
1155.04(f)of this Zoning Code.
            ii.   Bench billboards shall be placed so as to not interfere with
or obstruct the clear vision of pedestrians and motorists to detect approaching
traffic at intersections; nor impede the ability of pedestrians to travel along
public rights-of-way.
            iii.   No bench billboard shall contribute to visual clutter or
create a dangerous distraction or obstruction for pedestrians and motorists.
   (g)   Temporary signs must be removed upon expiration of the temporary sign
permit.
   (h)   Any other sign that is not listed in Section
1155.04 as a sign not requiring a permit.
      (Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.05  PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Signs prohibited are:
   (a)   Animated signs, except signs permitted in the Downtown Sign District.
   (b)   Abandoned signs.
   (c)    Balloons.
   (d)   Hazardous signs, including portable signs attached to or being held by
a natural person.
   (e)   Non public signs located on or over public rights of way except as
hereinafter permitted in the Downtown Sign District, and except for bench
billboard when the owner of the bench billboard has entered into a contract
with the City of Springfield
   (f)   Portable signs except for portable signs attached to or being held by
a person and those portable signs for which a Temporary Sign Permit has been
issued.
   (g)   Roof signs.
   (h)   Spinners and other similar devices.
      (Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.06  SIGNS PERMITTED BY SIGN DISTRICT.
   The locational and development regulations governing the sign districts
identified on the Springfield Sign District overlay map to the City's zoning
map are delineated in the following tables, which are included at the end of
this Chapter.
   Map A:    District Overlay Map
   Table B:    Commercial Highway Sign District
   Table C:    Commercial Arterial Sign District
   Table D:    Mixed Neighborhood Sign District
   Table E:    Mixed Urban Sign District
   Table F:    Downtown Sign District
   Table G:    Residential Sign Districts
   Table H:    Manufacturing Sign District
   Table I:    Green Space/Agricultural Sign District
   (a)   G zoning district requirements.  The following requirements shall
apply to Zoning Code Section
1126 G districts:  Institutional signs shall be permitted as regulated in
Section
1155.04 (c) or any other sign approved by City Commission.
   (b)   Non-conforming Residential Uses.  Lawful, non-conforming residential
uses shall be permitted those signs permitted to the residential sign district.
      (Ord. No. 10-317. Passed 10-12-10.)
 
1155.07  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Maximum sign area.  The maximum number of signs and the maximum
sign areas, as provided herein, shall be applied on a per lot basis (except in
the RM-44A zoning district where they shall be applied on a per building
basis.)
         A.   Free standing and monument signs.  An individual sign area
allowance is the sum of the total areas of all the sign faces of that sign.
         B.   The building wall sign allowance shall be calculated based on the
square feet of the wall on to which the sign will be placed. The wall sign
maximum area allowance shall be determined as percentage of the overall wall
area of the wall onto which the sign will be placed. In the case of two or more
uses or occupants in a single building, the allowable maximum wall signage for
each user shall be calculated as a percentage of the building elevation area
devoted to that tenant.
      (2)   Sign wall area.  Where maximum size of a sign is determined by the
sign wall area, the sign wall area shall be the total area of the building
elevation on to which the sign is to be mounted.
      (3)     Sign area determination.  The area of each sign, regardless of
shape, shall be computed by determining the area of a triangle, rectangle or
circle which completely encloses the outer perimeter of the sign face exclusive
of the structural supports but inclusive of architectural features, or which
completely encloses the whole group of characters or words in the case of a
sign composed of characters or words attached directly to a building or an
appurtenance to a building.
      (4)     Sign height determination.  The maximum height of a sign shall be
measured from the established grade of the ground on which the sign is erected
to the highest point of the sign.  In the case where a minimum height is
established, the minimum height shall be measured from the established grade of
the ground on which the sign is erected to the highest point of the sign face.
 
   (b)   Locational requirements.
      (1)   Except in the Downtown sign district, no off premise sign, canopy,
free standing or monument sign which is over two-and-one-half feet above grade
shall be located within a triangular area at street intersections, where the
triangle is measured from the intersection of right-of-way  lines and its sides
are 60 feet in length along arterial streets, 40 feet in length along collector
streets, and 20 feet in length along local streets except if the sign is 10
feet or more above grade with its single support structure being one foot wide
or less.
      (2)   Except in the Downtown sign district, no off premise sign, canopy,
free standing or monument sign which is over two-and-one-half feet above grade
shall be located within a triangular area where an alley or private drive
intersects a street where the triangle is measured from the intersection of
street right-of-way  line and edge of the alley or drive and its sides are 70
feet in length along the right-of-way line and eight feet along the alley or
drive edge except if the sign is 10 feet or more above grade with its single
support structure being one foot wide or less.
      (3)     No part of a monument sign or freestanding sign support shall be
located within five feet of any lot line and no part of any other sign or sign
support shall overhang any lot lines except for signs projecting over right-of-
way lines as hereinbefore permitted in the Downtown sign district.
      (4)     No sign shall obstruct ingress to or egress from any door, window
or fire escape.  No sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
      (5)     Building signs maybe located on any building wall.
 
   (c)     Requirements for illuminated signs.  Illuminated signs shall conform
to the following requirements:
      (1)     All permitted signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
Those signs permitted in the Residential Sign District or residentially zoned
lots may only be illuminated with white light.
      (2)   All types of artificial light sources used to illuminate a sign
face which are not shaded or concealed so that the light will not interfere
with the vision of motor vehicle operators or shine directly on residential
property in any Residential Sign District or residentially zoned area, and
illumination which flashes or simulates movement, shall be prohibited.
      (3)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the
vision of a motor vehicle driver or to otherwise interfere with the driver's
operation of a motor vehicle.
      (4)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes
with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal.
      (5)   These signs must be equipped with a mechanism that automatically
adjusts the brightness to maintain compliance with the illumination standards
of this subdivision (c).
      (6)   These signs must be equipped with a means to immediately turn off
the display or lighting if it malfunctions and/or poses a threat to public
safety. The owner of these signs must immediately turn off the sign and/or
lighting when ordered to do so by the City if the sign cannot be immediately
adjusted to comply with the illuminated sign standards set forth in these
regulations or it otherwise poses a threat to public safety.
      (7)   Illuminated signs must adhere to the following standards listed in
Tables 1 and 2.
 
Table 1: These are the Maximum Luminance Standards for daytime hours and are
measured in nits (one candela per square meter (1 cd/m²). During the time
between the First Sunday in November through the Second Sunday in March the
standard daytime hours are 7:30 a.m. until 6 p.m. During the time between the
Second Sunday in March through the First Sunday in November the standard
daytime hours are 6 a.m. until 7:30 p.m. (Times based on information provided
by the Astronomical Application Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory)
 
 
DAYTIME MAXIMUM NITS BY SIGN DISTRICT
                                      Mixed Urban and     Commercial Arterial,
Ag and Residential Mixed Neighborhood Manufacturing       Commercial Highway,
                                                          and Downtown
                                      800                 1000
100                600                (600 in inclement   (600 in inclement
                                      weather, such as    weather, such as fog,
                                      fog, rain, or snow) rain, or snow)
 
Table 2: These are the Maximum Luminance Standards for nighttime hours and are
measured in nits (one candela per square meter (1 cd/m²). During the time
between the First Sunday in November through the Second Sunday in March the
standard nighttime hours are 6 p.m. until 7:30 a.m. During the time between the
Second Sunday in March through the First Sunday in November the standard
nighttime hours are 7:30 p.m. until 6 a.m. (Times based on information provided
by the Astronomical Application Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory)
 
 
Nighttime Maximum Nits by Sign District
                                      Mixed Urban and Commercial Arterial,
Ag and Residential Mixed Neighborhood Manufacturing   Commercial Highway, and
                                                      Downtown
                                                      500
30                 200                200             (200 in inclement
                                                      weather, such as fog,
                                                      rain, or snow)
 
   (d)   Non conforming status. 
      (1)   All signs, which are not obsolete and which are or become non
conforming by adoption of these regulations, shall be permitted to remain as
non conforming signs.
      (2)   Non-conforming signs that are obsolete, being signs on which the
copy face no longer contains advertising material or is not used for
advertising purposes, the business is no longer at that location, the event has
past, or the sign is illegible, must be removed after a 365 consecutive day
period of obsolescence. The following process will be adhered to for such non-
conforming :
         A.   Notice to be sent to property owner notifying them that their
sign has 365 days to become conforming.
         B.   Notice to be sent to property owner notifying them that their
sign has 90 days to become conforming.
         C.   Notice to be sent to property owner notifying them that their
sign has 30 days to become conforming.
         D.   Notice to be sent to property owner on the 366th day with a
scheduled date of demolition to be paid for by the property owner.
      (3)   Owners of non conforming signs shall be required to comply with the
maintenance provisions of Section
1155.09.  Any change or alteration to a non conforming sign shall require
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
      (4)   Owners of non-conforming single-faced off-premises billboard signs
may double-face such structure (up to 300 square feet) by one square foot for
every two square feet of lawfully existing non-conforming off-premises
billboard sign area (in applicant's ownership) removed from the City of
Springfield.
 
   (e)    Signs for nonconforming uses.  Refer to Section
1171.02(b)(3).
 
   (f)     Historic and Cultural sign provisions.  The following signs shall be
regulated in accordance with the criteria indicated:
      (1)     Historic signs, signs for historic structures and signs on
structures in historic districts.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may, by
conditional use, allow signs which do not conform to the provisions of this
Chapter under the circumstances described below.  All applications for special
exceptions in a Historic District shall be referred to the Historic Landmarks
Commission for review and comment before and after the Board of Zoning Appeals
hearing, and shall be subject to the specific standards listed below and to the
general standards of Section
1172.05
         A.     For buildings placed on the National Register of Historic
Places or located in an OHP district, signage which does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter may be allowed if it is in keeping with the
architectural character of the structure, and is appropriate to a particular
period in the building's history or an integral part of its identity.
         B.     The Board may exempt a proposed or an existing sign from the
provisions of Subsection
1155.07(f)(1)A if it can be demonstrated that said sign makes a significant
artistic or historic contribution to the community or neighborhood in which the
sign is located.
      (2)     Drive-thru menu displays.  The portion of the sign face of a
drive-thru menu display on which items for sale and their prices are listed
shall not be included in calculating the number of square feet of signage in
applying maximum signage allowance specified in each sign district; provided
that such portion of the sign face of a drive-thru menu display on which items
for sale and their prices are listed does not exceed 40 square feet.
 
   (g)   Digital Dynamic Display Sign Operational Regulations.
      (1)    Digital Dynamic Display Sign (Single Color). Owners of Digital
Dynamic Display Single Color Signs shall operate their sign in conformance with
the following :
         A.   Shall comply with all locational and development regulations in
tables located in Section
1155.06.
         B.   These signs shall be operated so that the sign message remains
constant for a period of at least eight seconds before changing to another sign
message.
         C.   These signs shall not have continual motion.
         D.   The images and messages displayed must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any
special effects.
            i.   There shall be no left and right flow of messages
            ii.   No up and down scrolling or otherwise
            iii.   No moving or flashing of images displayed on the sign
            iv.   No cross fade with simultaneous dissolve and appearance of
sign messages.
         E.   Each sign shall be operated in conformance with the illuminated
sign standards in Section
1155.07(c).
         F.   Digital Dynamic Display Single Color Signs shall use automatic
level controls to reduce light levels at night and under cloudy and other
darkened conditions, in accordance with the following:
            i.   All Digital Dynamic Display signs shall have installed
equipment that will automatically adjust luminance based on time of day in
order to be compliant with this Ordinance.
            ii.   These signs must be equipped with a means to immediately turn
off the display or lighting if it malfunctions and/or poses a threat to public
safety, such as fails or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed
manner, causing motion, movement, flashing or any similar effects.
            iii.   The owner of these signs must immediately turn off the sign
and/or lighting when ordered to do so by the City when the City has determined
that it is not complying with the illuminated sign standards set forth in these
regulations or it otherwise poses a threat to public safety, if the sign cannot
be immediately adjusted to comply with the illuminated sign standards set forth
in these regulations and cease to pose a threat to public safety. A
malfunctioning sign or a sign not in compliance with these operational
standards shall remain turned off until it may be restored to operate in
conformity to the requirements of this ordinance.
            iv.   Written certification and photometric plan from the sign
manufacturer or a professional engineer must be provided at the time of
application for a sign permit certifying that the light intensity of the sign
has been preset not to exceed the illumination levels established by this
Ordinance, and an affidavit signed by the owner that the preset intensity level
will not be increased in excess of standards set forth in Section
1155.07(c).
            v.   A copy of the operations manual must be submitted with sign
permit application.
      (2)     Digital Dynamic Display Sign (Multiple Color). Owners of Digital
Dynamic Display Multi-Color Signs shall operate their sign in conformance with
the following regulations:
         A.   Shall comply with all locational and development regulations in
tables located in Section
1155.06.
         B.   These signs shall not have continual motion.
         C.   The images and messages displayed must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any
special effects.
            i.   There shall be no left and right flow of messages
            ii.   No up and down scrolling or otherwise traveling
            iii.   No moving or flashing of images displayed on the sign
            iv.   No cross fade with simultaneous dissolve and appearance of
sign messages.
         D.   Each sign shall be operated in conformance with the illuminated
sign standards in Section
1155.07(c).
         E.   Image transition timing requirements:
            i.   ommercial Highway Sign District: All signs shall be operated
so that the sign message remains static for a period of eight seconds before
changing to another sign message.
            ii.   Commercial Arterial Sign District: All signs shall be
operated so that the sign message remains static for a period of 12 seconds
before changing to another sign message.
            iii.   Downtown Sign District: All signs shall be operated so that
the sign message remains static for a period of 15 seconds before changing to
another sign message.
            iv.   Mixed Urban Sign District: All signs shall be operated so
that the sign message remains static for a period of 15 seconds before changing
to another sign message.
            v.   Mixed Neighborhood: Sign District: All signs shall be operated
so that the sign message remains static for a period of 20 seconds before
changing to another sign message.
            vi.   Manufacturing Sign District: All signs shall be operated so
that the sign message remains static for a period of 20 seconds before changing
to another sign message.
         F.   Digital Dynamic Display Multiple Color Signs shall use automatic
level controls to reduce light levels at night and under cloudy and other
darkened conditions, in accordance with the following:
            i.   All Digital Dynamic Display signs shall have installed
equipment that will automatically adjust luminance based on time of day in
order to be compliant with this Ordinance.
            ii.   These signs must be equipped with a means to immediately turn
off the display or lighting if it malfunctions and/or poses a threat to public
safety, such as fails or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed
manner, causing motion, movement, flashing or any similar effects.
            iii.   The owner of these signs must immediately turn off the sign
and/or lighting when ordered to do so by the City when the City has determined
that it is not complying with the illuminated sign standards set forth in these
regulations or it otherwise poses a threat to public safety, if the sign cannot
be immediately adjusted to comply with the illuminated sign standards set forth
in these regulations and cease to pose a threat to public safety. A
malfunctioning sign or a sign not in compliance with these operational
standards shall remain turned off until it may be restored to operate in
conformity to the requirements of this ordinance.
            iv.   Written certification and photometric plan from the sign
manufacturer or a professional engineer must be provided at the time of
application for a sign permit certifying that the light intensity of the sign
has been preset not to exceed the illumination levels established by this
Ordinance, and an affidavit signed by the owner that the preset intensity level
will not be increased in excess of standards set forth in Section
1155.07(c).
            v.   A copy of the operations manual must be submitted with sign
permit application.
         G.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have power and original
jurisdiction to hear and decide applications for a conditional use permit to
allow Digital Dynamic Display Multiple Color Signs in Commercial Arterial,
Mixed Neighborhood, Mixed Urban, Downtown, and Manufacturing Sign Districts. In
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall review the facts and circumstances of each proposed conditional
use and apply the provisions of Subdivisions
1172.05 (c) through (e) of the Zoning Code and the following standards:
            i.   Longitudinal Location. Digital Dynamic Display Multiple color
Signs should not be erected in locations that already place high demands upon
driver attention, such as intersections, interchange entry and exit points,
channelization features, close proximity to traffic control devices (including
official route markings and directional signing), highway structures (bridges,
viaducts, overpasses), and other roadway features which require a high level of
attention to the driving task (by way of example, sharp curves, land drops,
"weaving" areas, areas of reduced sight distance).
            ii.   Spacing and Density. This refers to the number of digital
signs that are located within a specified linear distance adjacent to the
roadside areas, and how these signs affect highway traffic safety and
successful delivery of informational messages to motorists. An approaching
driver should not be able to see two or more Dynamic Display Multiple Color
signs within his field of view at the same time. Each Sign district has a
different potential detection distance that defines the distance of a driver's
field of vision. The following table lists the detection distance of each sign
code district:
 
 
Sign District                     Detection Distance
Commercial Highway Sign District  1,200 ft +
Commercial Arterial Sign District 1,000 ft +
Mixed Neighborhood Sign District  800 ft +
Mixed Urban Sign District         500 ft +
Downtown Sign District            300 ft +
Residential Sign Districts        400 ft +
Manufacturing Sign District       500 ft +
Agricultural Sign District        NA
 
            iii.   Lateral Location. In determining conditions to impose on the
distance that Digital Display Multiple Color Signs are set back from the
highway, measured in distance from the edge of the main traveled way or the
angle of a Digital Display Multiple Color Sign on which the messages are
displayed relative to the line of sight of motorists on the adjacent highway.
Dynamic Display Multiple Color Signs should be located and angled so as to
reduce the need for a driver to turn their head to read them as they .
            iv.   Interaction with Traffic Signs. Dynamic Display Multiple
Color Signs should be located so as not to be detrimentally affect the
effectiveness of official traffic control devices. Dynamic Display Multiple
Color Signs should not be erected in locations that distract drivers from or
prevent drivers from seeing traffic control information (i.e. road markings,
traffic signs and traffic signals) in roadway settings where drivers must make
decision and take actions.
            v.   Compatibility with Ambient Environment: Dynamic Display
Multiple Color Signs should not be located where they will create a harsh
visual contrast with the ambient environment where they will not be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity or where they will change the essential character of the area.
               (Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.08  LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)     License required.  Except for those signs not requiring a permit, as
listed in Section
1155.03, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, move, improve,
remove or convert any sign without having a general contractors license in good
standing issued by the City according to the provisions of Chapter
1327 of Part 13 of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio, unless it is
the owner of the business when the sign is being installed by that owner.
 
   (b)     Permit required.  No sign requiring a permit shall be erected,
altered, moved, improved or converted without first obtaining a sign permit
from the Community Development Director or his/her designee and making payment
of the required permit fee.  In addition, an electrical permit for all
illuminated signs shall be obtained.
 
   (c)     Permit fees.  Every applicant, before being issued a sign permit,
shall pay to the City such fee as shall be established.  However, any person
found to be erecting, altering, moving, improving or converting any sign prior
to the issuance of a permit, or who has erected, altered, moved, improved or
converted a sign prior to the issuance of a permit, shall be charged double the
normal fee.  The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from
fully complying with the requirements of these regulations in the execution of
the work, nor from any other penalties.
 
   (d)   Permits for illuminated signs.  Applications for signs in which
electrical wiring and connections are to be used, shall be submitted to the
Building Official or his/her designee.  The Building Official or his/her
designee shall examine the plans and specifications for all wiring and
connections to determine if they comply with the Electrical Code.
 
   (e)   Temporary Sign Permits.  The Community Development Director or his/her
designee may issue Temporary Sign Permits, subject to the following
limitations:
      (1)     No temporary sign shall be permitted if displaying the sign will
be injurious to or contrary to the purposes to be accomplished by Chapter
1155 Sign Requirements.
      (2)     If the temporary sign is not firmly attached to the ground or to
a building, the temporary sign shall be constructed so as to be able to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour without falling
over or blowing away.
      (3)   No sign shall be displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive
days.
      (4)   No more than six (6) Temporary Sign Permits shall be issued to any
one occupied unit within any one (1) calendar year.
      (5)   No more than one Temporary Sign permit shall be issued to any one
occupied unit for display of a temporary sign during any one time.
      (6)   No more than one (1) temporary sign shall be displayed for every
100 linear feet of frontage in a commercial development.
      (7)   Signs shall not be located closer than 10 feet from the property
line or lease line for the address separating such address from the adjacent
address. 
      (8)   Additional signage or exceptions to these regulations may be
requested through a conditional use permit application to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
      (9)   A minimum time period of fourteen (14) consecutive days in which no
temporary signage is displayed must elapse between the removal and placement of
any subsequent temporary signage.
      (10)   Expired and non-permitted temporary signs are to be defined and
treated as 'rubbish' pursuant to Chapter
1323 of Part 13 of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio, for the
purposes of removal by the City.
 
   (f)   Applications.  Application for a sign permit shall be made upon a form
provided by the Community Development Director or his/her designee and shall
contain and have attached thereto a plot plan with the following information;
unless the Community Development Director or his/her designee determines that
one or more of the following items is not need for a particular application:
      (1)     Name, address, telephone number and license number (when
applicable) of the applicant and owner.
      (2)     Location of the sign and of the building, structure or lot on
which the sign is to be attached or erected.  The plot plan for free standing
or monument signs shall include existing driveways and the signs setback from
such driveways and the lot lines.
      (3)     Two blueprints or drawings of the plans and specifications of the
sign with dimensions, notation of materials, the type of construction and
method of attachment to the ground or building.
      (4)     Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is
designed in accordance with the Building Code when required by the building
Code.
      (5)     An application for an electrical permit for signs using
electricity.
      (6)     Such other information as may be required.
 
   (g)     Permit issued.  Upon the filing of an application for a sign permit,
it shall be the duty of the Community Development Director or his designee to
examine such application. If the proposed sign is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the City or
State, the sign permit shall then be issued.
 
   (h)    Permit expiration.  If the work authorized under a sign permit has
not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, said permit
shall become null and void.  Temporary Sign Permits shall contain an expiration
date which shall not be more than 30 days after the issuance date of the
permit.
(Ord. No. 10-242. Passed 8-3-10.)
 
1155.09  CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND ABANDONMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)     Construction.  All signs that require a permit except temporary
signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not
less than that required by the Building Code.  Applications for such signs
shall be submitted to the Building Official or his/her designee.  The Building
Official or his/her designee shall examine the plans and specifications to
determine if they comply with the Building Code.  In addition to the foregoing
construction requirements:
      (1)   All banners, where permitted, shall be securely fastened on all
four corners to an immovable object.
      (2)   The sign face of a canopy sign shall not extend beyond the canopy
surface more than six inches.
      (3)   A fascia sign shall not extend more than one foot out from the
vertical wall to which it is attached nor more than one foot out at the sign's
closest point from non vertical wall to which it is attached.
      (4)   All free standing signs shall be securely fastened to the ground.
 
   (b)   Maintenance.  All signs shall be maintained in such a manner as to
avoid becoming a hazardous sign.  All signs regulated by this chapter shall be
maintained in such a condition so that the sign face and the sign supporting
structure is safe and in compliance with the regulations adopted in Chapter
1305 of the Codified Ordinances. All signs shall be maintained by repairing or
replacing surfaces which are severely weathered, severely faded, torn, flaking
or chipping, or have streaked or running characters or graphics.  At such time
that maintenance is performed, no change in the existing sign shall occur to
alter the sign to make the sign nonconforming or nonconforming to any greater
degree than at the time of adoption of this code.
 
   (c)     Removal.  In accordance with the following procedure, the Building
Official or his/her designee shall be authorized to require the removal of any
prohibited sign.  The Building Official shall use the procedure specified in
Chapters
1323 and
1324 of the Codified Ordinances for notifying a property owner or sign owner to
remove such prohibited sign.
 
   (d)    Sign Abandonment.  The following signs shall be regulated in
accordance with the criteria indicated: Abandoned signs are prohibited and
shall be removed by the sign owner immediately upon becoming an abandoned sign.
 
MAP - LEGEND SIGN TYPE
MAP A
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4939.jpg]
 
 
TABLES
 
 
Green Space _ Ag
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4987.jpg]
 
 
Commercial Arterial
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5036.jpg]
 
 
Commercial Arterial (Cont.)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5086.jpg]
 
 
Commercial Highway
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5151.jpg]
 
 
Commercial Highway (Continued)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5217.jpg]
 
 
Downtown
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5284.jpg]
 
 
Downtown (Continued)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5352.jpg]
 
 
Manufacturing
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5421.jpg]
 
 
Manufacturing (Continued)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5491.jpg]
 
 
Mixed Neighborhood
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5562.jpg]
 
 
Mixed Neighborhood (Continued)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5634.jpg]
 
 
Mixed Urban
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5707.jpg]
 
 
Mixed Urban (Continued)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5781.jpg]
 
 
Residential
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5856.jpg]
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1156
Fence and Hedge Requirements
 
1156.01   Location and height.
1156.02   Enclosures.
1156.03   Barbed wire and electric fences.
 
1156.01  LOCATION AND HEIGHT.
   A wall, hedge, or fence not over eight (8) feet high may be erected in any
front, side, or rear yard or court provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (a)   The height of any such wall, hedge, or fence shall not exceed the
distance from that point to the nearest point of any building.  However, a wall
or fence may be erected to a height of four (4) feet where it is to be located
less than four (4) feet from an adjacent building.
   (b)   In any front yard, a wall or fence more than ten (10) percent solid
shall not exceed a height of two and one-half (2.5) feet, except where a solid
wall, hedge or fence is required by this code for screening purposes and except
where visibility triangles are provided as required by subsection below.
   (c)   In an R or C District or within fifty (50) feet of an R or C District
along the same frontage, walls, hedges or fences within the front yard shall
not exceed a height of four (4) feet.
   (d)   Visibility at intersections:
      1.   Street intersections.  A visibility triangle with no wall, hedge or
fence more than ten (10) percent solid above the height of 2.5 feet shall be
provided at all street intersections including at least the area within the
first twenty (20) feet along the intersecting right-of-way lines (projected if
rounded) and a line connecting the ends of such twenty-foot lines.
      2.   Intersections of alleys with streets.  A visibility triangle with no
wall, hedge or fence more than ten (10) percent solid above the height of  2.5
feet high shall be provided at all intersections of alleys with streets
including at least the area within the first ten (10) feet along the
intersecting right-of-way lines (projected if rounded) and a line connecting
the ends of such ten-foot lines.
      3.   Intersection of driveways with streets.  A visibility triangle with
no wall, hedge or fence more than ten (10) percent solid above the height of
2.5 feet high shall be provided by measuring ten (10) feet in from  the
intersection of a driveway boundary and property lines away from  the driveway
with the ends of the two 10-foot lines connected  in a straight line to form
the visibility triangle.
      4.   At intersections of alleys with alleys.  A visibility triangle with
no wall, hedge or fence more than ten (10) percent solid above the height of
2.5 feet high shall be provided at all intersections of alleys with alleys
including at least the area within the first ten (10) feet along the
intersecting right-of-way lines (projected if rounded) and a line connecting
the ends of such ten-foot lines.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/44d6add3338243bd6e46e58e04b0cc03821491e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3966.jpg]
 
1156.02  ENCLOSURES.
   Except as otherwise provided, fenced enclosures shall be provided for dog
runs and for swimming pools with a depth of 36 inches or more and shall be
subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   Dog runs shall be enclosed by a fence of sufficient height and
construction to contain the dog at all times.
   (b)   An outdoor swimming pool, the edge of which is less than four (4) feet
above grade, shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four (4)
feet in height.  The fence shall be so constructed as not to allow a five (5)
inch diameter sphere to pass through the fence.  A principal or accessory
building may be used as part of such enclosure.
   (c)   All gates or doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with
a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any
building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.  The
Building Official or his designee may permit other protective devices or
structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the
substitute device or structure is not less than the protection afforded herein.
      (Ord. 02-177. Passed 4-16-02.)
 
1156.03  BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
Except in the A Agricultural District, barbed wire and electric fences shall be
subject to the following requirements.
   (a)   Barbed wire shall consist of twisted wires with barbs on each wire a
minimum distance of four (4) inches apart.  Concertina wire shall be
prohibited.
   (b)   Except for the enclosure of livestock operations, barbed wire fences
shall be permitted only in the C, M, or RDP districts, provided that the bottom
strand of barbed wire shall not be less than six (6) feet above grade.
      (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
   (c)   Except for the enclosure of livestock operations, electric fences
shall not be permitted in any district.
   (d)   An electric fence for the enclosure of livestock operations shall not
carry a charge greater than 25 milliamperes nor a pulsating current longer than
one-tenth (1/10) second in a one (1) second cycle.  All electric fence charges
shall carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
   (e)   Barbed wire and electric fences shall be prohibited within five (5)
feet of a public sidewalk or within five (5) feet of a street right-of-way line
where a public sidewalk does not now exist.
 
 
 
TITLE SIX - Accessory Use and Structural Requirements
Chap.
1158.   Tree Regulations.
Chap.
1161.   Performance Standards.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1158
Tree Regulations
 
1158.01   General.
1158.02   Specific requirements.
 
1158.01  GENERAL.
   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of these regulations is to assure that trees are
planted and/or preserved with the development or redevelopment of buildings and
parking areas and with the establishment or conversion of uses according to the
best ecological concepts, environmental objectives, and site planning
principles.
 
   (b)   General applicability.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for the establishment or conversion of any use without conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.  However, the following shall be exempt from this
chapter:
      (1)   Property developed according to the yard requirements of the
district in such a manner that insufficient area is available to achieve
compliance with the tree regulations; however, all trees that can be in
compliance with these requirements shall be provided.
      (2)   Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling, except a townhouse.
 
   (c)   Recommended species of trees.  The varieties and sizes of trees
permitted by this code for the use indicated are specified in the list of
Recommended Trees for Springfield, Ohio, (as provided by the City Forestry
Division.)  Trees not included on the list may be used to fulfill the
requirements of this chapter upon approval of the City Forestry Division.
 
   (d)   Installation.  All tree plantings required by this chapter shall be
installed before occupancy or commencement of a use.  If because of weather
conditions the plantings cannot be installed before occupancy or commencement
of a use, the Community Development Director or Director's designee may issue a
temporary zoning certificate and grant a delay of tree installation until the
seasonal calendar dates of March 15 or September 1, whichever occurs first. 
Tree installation shall then occur within 60 days after the calendar date.
 
   (e)   Planting sizes.  The following specifications shall be met at the time
of planting:
      (1)   Large deciduous trees.  This type of tree shall have a minimum
trunk diameter of two (2) inches when measured six (6) inches above established
grade and show the growth capabilities, branch formation and crown balance that
is indigenous to the particular variety.  This type of tree is regarded as a
"large" tree in this chapter and will attain a height of 45 feet or more.
      (2)   Medium deciduous trees.  This type of tree shall have a single stem
and a minimum trunk diameter of two (2) inches when measured six (6) inches
above established grade and show the growth capabilities, branch formation and
crown balance that is indigenous to the particular variety.  This type of tree
is regarded as a "medium" tree in this chapter and will attain a height of 30
to 45 feet.
      (3)   Small deciduous trees.  This type of tree shall have a single stem
and a minimum trunk diameter of two (2) inches when measured six (6) inches
above grade and show the growth capabilities, branch formation and crown
balance that is indigenous to the particular variety.  This type of tree is
regarded as a "small" tree in this chapter and will attain a height of 20 to 30
feet.
      (4)   Coniferous trees.  This type of tree shall have a minimum height of
five (5) feet when measured from the planted level to the top of the tree. 
This height may be reduced to three (3) feet when it is required to be used for
screening purposes.  The needle color and branching habits shall be normal for
the species and the appearance shall be indicative of previous care in pruning
and development.
 
   (f)   Maintenance.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a lot to
maintain and replace, if necessary, trees required by these provisions after
their planting. Any trees on the public right-of-way or on private property
that overhang the public right-of-way shall be maintained according to the
provisions of Chapter
907 of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield, Ohio, as amended.  All plantings
shall be properly weeded, mulched, and kept free of trash and other unsightly
material.
 
   (g)   General provisions.
      (1)   The required distance for the location of a tree shall mean the
distance to the center of the trunk.
      (2)   Where fractional numbers of trees result, the number of trees
required shall be rounded to the closest whole number.  If the fractional
amount is one half (1/2), the next lowest whole number shall be applied.
      (3)   Existing trees may be used to satisfy the requirements of the tree
regulations, provided they meet the minimum size requirements for trees at
initial planting and they are an approved tree per the list of Recommended
Trees for Springfield, Ohio, or are approved by the City Forestry Division.
 
   (h)   Site plan.  When provisions of the tree regulations are applicable, a
plot plan shall be submitted with the request for a zoning certificate and
shall include:
      (1)   The size and location of required planting areas; and
      (2)   The mature height (small, medium, or large), location, and type
(evergreen or deciduous) of existing and proposed tree plantings within and
adjacent to the street right-of- way.
      (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
1158.02  SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Trees adjacent to and within street rights-of- way.  The following
provisions shall regulate the planting of trees adjacent to and within street
rights-of-way.
      (1)   Applicability.
         A.   Whenever a new use is established or the conversion of a use
occurs, the requirements of this subsection shall be applicable to the entire
lot.
         B.   Whenever a principal building is constructed, reconstructed or
structurally altered by one or more additions, the total of which increases the
floor area by more than 10 percent, the requirements of this subsection shall
be applicable to the entire lot on which the building is located.  If there is
more than one building on a lot, this provision shall apply when the total
floor area for all the buildings is increased by more than 10 percent.
         C.   If any provision of this chapter would preclude the planting of
one or more trees adjacent to the right-of-way, the trees that cannot be
planted adjacent to the right-of-way shall be planted within the right-of-way
according to the provisions of paragraph
1158.02(a)(3) titled Placement of trees within street rights-of-way.  Trees
that cannot then be planted in conformity with the provisions of that paragraph
may be omitted.
      (2)   Required tree planting adjacent to street rights-of-way.
         A.   Trees shall be planted at a minimum ratio of one tree for every
40 feet of lot frontage.
         B.   Trees shall be planted adjacent to street rights-of-way.
         C.   Large and medium trees shall not be spaced closer than 30 feet
apart nor closer than 14 feet of a building. Small trees shall not be spaced
closer than 16 feet apart nor closer than (8) feet of a building.  Where
screening is appropriate or required, this spacing may be reduced, provided the
trees are planted according to the provisions of subsection
1161.01(h), Screening, and are of a variety suitable for screening.
         D.   At street intersections, trees shall not be located within 70
feet of the intersection of curb lines (or pavement edge where curbs do not
exist) when planted along arterial streets, within 50 feet when planted along
collector streets, nor within 30 feet of the intersection of local streets. 
(City Engineer is to calculate distances.)
         E.   Trees shall be placed to avoid interference with the
construction, maintenance and operation of public and private utilities and
services above or below ground as determined by the utility companies and the
City Engineer.
      (3)   Placement of trees within street rights-of-way.
         A.   A tree planting permit shall be obtained from the City Forestry
Division; or for new developments, placement and species of trees in street
rights-of-way shall be provided on construction drawings.
         B.   No trees shall be planted where the width of the area between a
curb and a sidewalk is less than four (4) feet. If no sidewalk exists, the
width between a curb and a right-of-way line shall be at least nine (9) feet. 
Trees shall not be located within two (2) feet of a street curb or edge of
pavement where a curb does not exist, within two (2) feet of a sidewalk, nor
within six (6) feet of a right-of-way line where a sidewalk does not exist.
(City Engineer or Engineer's designee is to determine how close a tree should
be to the street pavement where a curb does not exist.)
         C.   At street intersections, trees shall not be located within 70
feet of the intersection of curb lines (or pavement edge where curbs do not
exist) when planted along arterial streets, within 50 feet when planted along
collector streets, nor within 30 feet of the intersection of local streets. 
(City Engineer or Engineer's designee is to calculate distances.)
         D.   At the intersection of a street and a drive or at the
intersection of a street and an alley, trees shall not be located within 15
feet of the edge of the drive or the right-of-way line of the alley.
         E.   Large and medium trees shall not be spaced closer than 30 feet
apart nor closer than 14 feet of a building. Small trees shall not be spaced
closer than 16 feet apart nor closer than eight (8) feet of a building.
         F.   Trees shall be placed to avoid interference with the
construction, maintenance and operation of public and private utilities and
services above or below ground as determined by the utility companies and the
City Engineer.
         G.   No tree shall be planted within 10 feet of a utility pole.
 
   (b)   Trees on private property for residential uses.
      (1)   Applicability.  Whenever a building containing a duplex or multi-
family residential use is constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered by
one or more additions, the total of which increases the floor area by more than
10 percent, the requirements of paragraph (2) shall be applied to the entire
lot on which the building is located.  If there is more than one (1) building
on a lot, this provision shall apply when the total floor area for all the
buildings is increased by more than 10 percent.
      (2)   Required tree planting for residential uses.
         A.   Trees shall be planted at the minimum ratio of one (1) tree for
every 500 square feet of total building coverage of the lot.  Existing trees
with a minimum trunk diameter of six (6) inches measured six (6) inches above
established grade may be substituted for new trees at the ratio of one (1)
existing tree for every two (2) new trees.  Where residential uses are combined
with other uses, the building coverage shall be determined on the basis of the
greatest amount of residential floor area of any floor that is wholly or
partially devoted to a residential use.  Except for trees planted for screening
purposes, trees planted to fulfill the requirements of Subsection
1158.02(a) titled Trees adjacent to and within street rights-of-way, and
Subsection
1158.02(b) titled Trees on private property for residential uses, may be used
to fulfill the requirements of this subsection.
         B.   Large and medium trees shall not be located closer than 14 feet
to a building.  Small trees shall not be located closer than eight (8) feet to
a building.
         C.   Trees shall not be located within four (4) feet of a  right-of-
way-line.
         D.   At street intersections within the right-of-way or within eight
(8) feet of the right-of-way, trees shall not be located within 70 feet of the
intersection of curb lines (or pavement edge where curbs do not exist) along
arterial streets, within 50 feet along collector streets, or within 30 feet
along local streets.  In instances where two different types of streets
intersect, the location of the tree shall be determined by the type of street
adjacent to the proposed tree. (City Engineer or Engineer's designee is to
calculate distances.)
            (Ord. 15-42. Passed 2-17-15.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1161
1161.01   General.
1161.02   Requirements.
 
1161.01  GENERAL.
   (a)   New uses.  Any commercial or industrial use established after the
effective date of this code shall comply with the minimum performance standards
contained in this chapter.
 
   (b)   Existing uses.  Existing lawfully conforming or nonconforming
commercial and industrial uses which are not in compliance with the performance
standards of this code are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
However, a use that does not comply with the standards shall not be increased
in the degree of noncompliance.  Such uses shall be permitted to be enlarged or
altered provided that the enlargement or alteration complies with these
performance standards.
 
   (c)   Certification.  When necessary, the Director of Community Development
or his designee may require of the applicant certification by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified person, at the expense of the
applicant, that the performance standards for a proposed use can be met.
 
1161.02  REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Smoke.  The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not
exceed a density or equivalent opacity permitted below.  For the purpose of
grading the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines shall be used.
      (1)   In the C and RDP districts, the emission beyond lot lines of smoke
darker in shade than Ringelmann No. 1 from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or
combustion process shall be prohibited.
      (2)   In the M districts, the emission of smoke darker in shade than
Ringelmann No. 2 from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process
beyond district boundary lines shall be prohibited, except that the emission of
smoke of a shade not to exceed Ringelmann No. 3 is permitted for not more than
three (3) minutes total in any one eight (8) hour period when starting or
cleaning a fire.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (b)   Particulate matter.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated
any furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or
synthetic fuels without using approved equipment, methods, or devices to reduce
the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air
exceeding a rate permitted below at the temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these conditions
shall apply when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed 50
percent at full load.  The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the
A.S.M.E. Test Code for dust-separating apparatus.  All other forms of dust,
dirt and lye ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission
into the open air is concerned.
      (1)   In the C and RDP districts, the emission of particulate matter
suspended in air shall not exceed 0.35 grains (.0023 ounces) per standard cubic
foot (70 degrees F. and 14.7 psia) of air during any one hour period or a total
from all vents and stacks of one-half (1/2) pound per acre of lot area during
any one hour period.
      (2)   In the M districts, the emission of particulate matter suspended in
air shall not exceed 0.35 grains (.0023 ounces) per standard cubic foot (70
degrees F. and 14.7 psia) of air during a one (1) one hour period for a total
from all vents and stacks of three (3) pounds per hour per acre of lot area
during any one hour period.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (c)   Toxic matter.  The release of airborne toxic matter from any operation
or activity shall not exceed the fractional quantities permitted below of the
Threshold Limit Values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists.  If a toxic substance is not listed, verification that
the proposed level of toxic matter will be safe and not detrimental to the
public health or injurious to plant and animal life shall be required.  The
measurement of toxic matter shall be on the average of any 24 hour sampling
period.
      (1)   In the C and RDP districts, the release beyond lot lines of
airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8th) of the Threshold
Limit Values.
      (2)   In the M districts, the release beyond district boundary lines of
airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8th) of the Threshold
Limit Values.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (d)   Odor.  The emission of offensive odorous matter from an operation or
activity shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration defined in the
American Society for Testing and Material Method D1391-57 "Standard Method for
Measurement of Odor in Atmosphere (Dilution Method)" as the level which will
just evoke a response in the human olfactory system when measured as follows:
      (1)   In the C and RDP districts, when measured five (5) feet above
ground level, odorous matter shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration
beyond lot lines.
      (2)   In the M districts, when measured five (5) feet above ground level,
odorous matter shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration beyond
district boundary lines.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (e)   Vibration.  Earthborne vibrations from any operation or activity shall
not exceed the displacement values below.  Vibration displacement shall be
measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three
mutually perpendicular directions.  The maximum vector resultant shall be less
than the vibration displacement permitted as determined by the following
formula:
 
 
D = K/
f      D =   displacement in inches
where:
      K =   constant given in table below
      f =   frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per
       second
 
 
 
Constant K by Type of Vibration
                                 Impulsive (at least 1
District and Place of            second rest between   Less than 8 pulses per
Measurement           Continuous pulses which do not   24-hr period
                                 exceed 1 second
                                 duration)
C & RDP District:     0.003      0.006                 0.015
at lot lines
M Districts:
at district boundary  0.030      0.060                 0.150
lines
at R Districts,
recreational area, or 0.003      0.006                 0.015 boundary lines
school
 
(Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (f)   Glare.  Glare or light from any operation and all lighting for parking
areas or for the external illumination of buildings or grounds shall be
directed or located in such a manner that all direct or indirect illumination
shall not exceed .35 footcandles at an R district boundary and the source of
light shall not be visible within an R district or within a lot of a conforming
residential use in a C district.
 
   (g)   Storage.  Except in the CC-2, CH-1, CI-1, M-1 and M-2 districts and in
the CB-10 district during times that an establishment is open for business, the
open storage of merchandise, materials and equipment shall not be permitted
unless the following requirements are met:
      (1)   Storage of merchandise, materials and equipment shall be completely
screened from view by a solid fence as required in Subsection (h) below.
      (2)   All flammable/combustible materials shall be stored in compliance
with Part 15 of the Codified Ordinances.
         (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
 
   (h)   Screening.  Where a lot occupied by a commercial or industrial use is
abutting or within 150 feet across a street, alley or railroad right-of-way
from a residential lot in an R district, screening shall be preserved, planted
or constructed and maintained by the owner of the commercial or industrial use
in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
      (1)   Location.
         A.   Except for a use in the RDP district, screening shall be provided
along side or rear lot lines in a manner sufficient to effectively obscure the
residential use from view of the commercial or industrial use a minimum of six
(6) feet above ground .
         B.   Across a street, alley or railroad right-of-way and in an RDP
district, screening shall be provided in a location and manner sufficient to
effectively obscure the residential use from view of all off-street parking and
loading, storage or other such areas of activity associated with the commercial
or industrial use a minimum of four (4) feet above ground level.
      (2)   Screening.
         A.   An evergreen planting screen of pyramidal arbor vitae, the
plantings being at least three (3) feet high when planted and spaced four (4)
feet on center, shall be used.  However, other evergreen varieties may be used
if approved by and spaced according to the City Forestry Division.  Where
because of physical limitations an arbor vitae screen will be ineffective, a
taller variety of evergreen plantings shall be used.  The planting bed shall
have a minimum dimension of four (4) feet, be free of any impervious surface,
and be separated from streets, drives and parking areas by an unmountable curb
or barrier in such a manner that sand and saltwater runoff will not damage the
screening.
            (Ord. 03-244.  Passed 7-8-03.)
         B.   Alternative to a planting screen, a solid fence of durable
construction; an earthen berm covered with grass or low shrubs; and/or other
acceptable materials which provide maximum visual obscurity to a minimum height
required by this code may be used.  A solid fence shall not constitute a public
nuisance as defined in Chapter
1323 of the Codified Ordinances of Springfield.
      (3)   Time of installation.
         A.   If a lot proposed for a commercial or industrial use is located
adjacent to or opposite an existing residential use or subdivision in an R
district, screening which meets the requirements of this chapter shall be
installed prior to occupancy or commencement of the use.  However, the
Community Development Director or his designee may grant a delay to install
plant materials during a more favorable part of the year.  If a delay is
granted, materials shall be installed before the seasonal calendar dates of
June 1 or November 1, whichever comes first.
         B.   If "A" above is not the case, screening need not be provided
until within six (6) months after a building permit is issued for a residential
use in an R district on adjacent or opposite land.
      (4)   Exceptions.
         A.   Screening need not be provided for cemeteries.
         B.   Screening may be waived by the Director of Community Development
or his designee where the view is or will be blocked by a change in grade or by
natural or man-made features to the same degree as would be provided by
screening which meets the requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Maintenance.  The owner shall keep all screening properly
maintained, free of trash and litter, and all mature plant materials pruned in
such a manner as to provide effective visual obscurity from the ground to the
height required by this chapter.
 
 
 
TITLE SEVEN - Nonconformities
Chap.   
1171.   Nonconformities
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1171
Nonconformities
 
1171.01   Purpose.
1171.02   General provisions.
1171.03   Nonconforming uses.
1171.04   Nonconforming structures.
1171.05   Nonconforming lots.
 
1171.01  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this code to regulate nonconforming uses and structures
because they are incompatible with permitted uses and structures in the
district in which they are located.  The lawful use of any building or land
existing on the effective date of this code may continue even though such use
or land does not conform with the provisions of this code.  Nonconforming
structures shall be regulated to prevent an increase in the degree of
nonconformity.
 
1171.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   The lawful use of any structure or premises existing and lawful at the
time of enactment of or an amendment to this code, may be continued, even
though such use does not conform with the provisions of this code. However,
nothing in this code shall be interpreted as authorization for continued use of
a structure or land established in violation of the zoning regulations in
effect prior to the enactment of this code and in continued violation of this
code.
 
   (b)   Regardless of any other provision of this code, a nonconforming use
shall be treated as a conforming use for as long as the use is in existence. 
Accordingly, the following rights shall be :
      (1)   If a nonconforming use is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God,
or by a public enemy, it may be restored.
      (2)   If a structure or structures for a nonconforming use is destroyed
or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by a public enemy, they may be
reconstructed.
      (3)   A nonconforming use shall be permitted to have the same amount and
type of signage as would be allowed for such use in the most restrictive
district in which such nonconforming use is .
      (4)   A nonconforming use may be converted to another nonconforming use
first permitted in the same or more restrictive district as the existing use,
provided it is not converted to a use permitted in a more restrictive district
than the district in which the nonconforming use is located.
 
1171.03  NONCONFORMING USES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, nonconforming uses and structures
for nonconforming uses shall be regulated as follows:
   (a)   No nonconforming use shall be relocated on a lot. However, if the
building is nonconforming, it may be relocated meeting the requirements of
Section
1171.04 below.
   (b)   A nonconforming use may be enlarged as a conditional use authorized by
the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided the following limitations shall :
      (1)   The enlargement may not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area
of the use when it first became nonconforming.
      (2)   The enlargement may not violate the yard and area requirements of
Chapter
1150 nor the height requirements of Chapter
1151.
   (c)   A nonconforming use that has become abandoned for one (1) year or more
shall revert to a conforming use.  However, a nonconforming use may be
reestablished as a conditional use authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
provided the following limitations shall :
      (1)   The conditional use shall be for one of the following uses:
         A.   The nonconforming use that previously.
         B.   Another nonconforming use first permitted in the same or more
restrictive district as the previous use and that is not a use permitted in a
more restrictive district than the district in which the nonconforming use is
located.
         C.   Any use that has been granted an exemption from federal taxes
under the Internal Revenue Code as a Section 501(c)(3) organization.
      (2)   The Board shall determine that the building in which the previous
nonconforming use was located is not suitable as a building for a conforming.
      (3)   The building in which the previous nonconforming use was located
shall be brought into compliance with other city and state regulations.
 
1171.04  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, nonconforming buildings and
structures shall be regulated as follows:
   (a)   Changes, including structural alterations, may be made to a
nonconforming structure or to a structure for a nonconforming use to meet the
minimum requirements of other city and state regulations.
   (b)   A nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God, or by a public enemy may be rebuilt as it existed
before.  However, the structure cannot be rebuilt or restored in a different
form or in a way that would increase its degree of nonconformity.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
   (c)   A nonconforming building in a Historic Preservation District that has
been damaged by fire, act of God, or by a public enemy regardless of the extent
of damage, may be restored as a conditional use authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.  However, the building may not be restored except in compliance
with the following requirements:
      (1)   The building shall be placed upon its original foundation or the
site of the original foundation or in a location that lessens the degree of the
building's nonconformity.
      (2)   The building shall be reconstructed as nearly as possible to the
original historic appearance of the building or as regulated by the Landmarks
Commission.
      (3)   The Landmarks Commission shall give authorization to the manner in
which the building is reconstructed.
   (d)   Any nonconforming structure containing a conforming use may be
converted to another conforming use.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided, a nonconforming structure may be
structurally enlarged, provided it is structurally enlarged in a way that does
not increase or extend the manner in which the structure is nonconforming.
   (f)   Any nonconforming structure that is relocated on the same lot shall
conform to the provisions of this code.
      (Ord. 02-177, passed 4-16-02; Ord. 13-79, passed 4-2-13.)
 
1171.05  NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, nonconforming lots shall be
regulated as follows:
   (a)   Any use or structure for a use permitted in the district in which the
nonconforming lot is located, may be established or built, provided the use or
structure meets all other requirements of this code.  However, if a lot in a
residential district does not have sufficient area for any residential use,
only a single-family dwelling may be constructed on the lot subject to building
setback and parking requirements.
   (b)   If two or more abutting lots are purchased by one person and either
one or both lots are nonconforming, the lots involved shall be deemed a single
lot for the purposes of this code and no portion of the combined lots shall be
sold or used that diminishes compliance with lot frontage, width, and area
requirements.
      (Ord. 02-177, passed 4-16-02.)
 
 
 
TITLE EIGHT - Board of Zoning Appeals
Chap.
1172.   Board of Zoning Appeals
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1172
Board of Zoning Appeals
 
1172.01   Establishment and appointment.
1172.02   Meetings, records, and general procedures.
1172.03   Applications, appeals, hearings, and decisions of the board.
1172.04   Interpretations of the code and map.
1172.05   Conditional uses.
1172.06   Variances.
1172.07   Powers; exercise and extent.
1172.08   Expiration of authorizations.
 
1172.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENT.
   (a)   A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established having the powers as
hereinafter indicated.  Such Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed
by the President of the City Commission with the consent of the Commission, and
shall include one (1) member of the City Planning Board.  The members of the
Board of Zoning Appeals and their terms of office as of June 4, 1991, shall be
established by an Ordinance enacted by the City Commission. The terms of the
representative of the City Planning Board shall expire with that of his
Planning Board appointment. No member shall serve more than three (3)
consecutive terms.  After a member has served during three (3) consecutive
terms, he shall be ineligible for reappointment to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.  As the terms of all members expire, except the representative of the
City Planning Board, their successors shall each be appointed for three-year
terms.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments,
and shall be for the unexpired term.
 
   (b)   The Director of Community Development or his designated representative
shall be the Secretary for the Board.  The Director of Community Development or
his designated representative shall be technical adviser to the Board and shall
be present at all meetings of the Board.
 
   (c)   Persons eligible for service on the Board shall meet the following
qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Board; provided, however one member may serve on both
the City Planning Board and the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (2)   Persons serving on the Board shall be electors of the city.
      (3)   A person who is a member of a City employee's family, as defined in
Section
111.04, or an elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Board.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Board
shall fail to meet any of the qualifications stated in subparagraphs (1)
through (3) of Section
1172, his office shall immediately become vacant.
      (5)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the Board,
may waive any or all of the requirements of subparagraphs (1) and (2) for such
appointee or member.
 
   (d)   If any Board member is absent from three (3) of any six (6)
consecutive regularly scheduled Board meetings, his office shall immediately
become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity to explain his absence
to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a majority of the City
Commission to complete the balance of his term.
 
1172.02  MEETINGS, RECORDS, AND GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson, and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  The Board shall
establish by rule the term of office for its Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and
other officers; provided, however, no Chairperson shall serve more than three
(3) years during a period of nine (9) consecutive years.  The term "year" shall
mean 12 consecutive months.  It shall adopt rules and regulations consistent
with all applicable laws and ordinances. Meetings of the Board shall be held
once each month, and at such additional times as the Board may determine;
provided, however, the Chairperson may cancel a meeting if no member has
proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of regular monthly
meetings shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the Board.  Special
meetings shall be called by the Chairperson or, in his absence, by the Vice
Chairperson.  There shall be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the action of
the Board and the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all its
official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.  The presence of four (4) members shall
constitute a quorum.  The concurring vote of the majority of a quorum, but in
no event fewer than the concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Director of Community Development or his authorized representative or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass in this Springfield Zoning Code, or to grant a variation from the
requirements of this Springfield Zoning Code.  The Board shall act by
resolution and a copy of each resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk of the City Commission.
 
   (c)   The Board may call on any City departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such departments to
render such assistance to the Board as may reasonably be required.  The
Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice Chairperson, may administer oaths. 
The Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and may inquire into and hear and examine witnesses in
relation to any matter which the Board has the authority to inquire into.  In
case any person in disobedience of any subpoena issued by the Board, fails or
refuses to attend and testify to any matter regarding which he may be lawfully
interrogated, the Board shall compel obedience by attachment proceedings for
contempt, as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena
issued from a court or a refusal to testify therein.
 
1172.03  APPLICATIONS, APPEALS, HEARINGS AND DECISIONS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedures specified by
law and by this chapter.  All applications and appeals made to the Board shall
be in writing and shall be filed with the Secretary at least 14 days before the
meeting at which they are to be heard. Each application or appeal shall refer
to the specific provision of the Springfield Zoning Code involved, and shall
set forth exactly the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which a
conditional use is sought, a clear description of the land involved or the
details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is
claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be.
   (a)   Filing Application.  An application to the Board, in cases in which it
has original jurisdiction under the provisions of this chapter, may be taken by
any property owner or tenant, or by a governmental officer, department, board
or bureau affected.  Such application, in a form approved by the Board, shall
be filed with the Director of Community Development or his authorized
representative who shall transmit the same, together with all the plans,
specifications and other papers pertaining to the application, to the Board.
   (b)   Filing Appeals.  An appeal to such Board from any ruling of the
Director of Community Development or his authorized representative
administering any portion of this Springfield Zoning Code may be taken by any
property owner or tenant, or by any governmental officer, department, board or
bureau affected.  Appeals to the Board shall be taken within 20 days after the
decision by filing with the Director of Community Development or his authorized
representative a notice of appeal, in a form approved by the Board, specifying
the grounds therefor.  The Director of Community Development or his authorized
representative shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken or, in lieu thereof,
certified copies of such papers.
   (c)   Hearings, Dates and Notices.  When an application or appeal has been
filed in proper form and with the required data, the Secretary of the Board
shall immediately place such application or appeal upon the calendar for
hearing and cause notices stating the time, place and object of the hearing to
be served personally or by mail at least 10 days, excluding Saturday, Sundays
and holidays, prior to the day of such hearing, upon the applicant or the
appellant, and to such persons as the Board may specify in its rules and
regulations which notices, if by mail, shall be sent to the last known address
of the respective property owners.  The Board shall also publish notice of such
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Clark County at least seven
(7) days prior to the public hearing.  Any party may appear at such hearings in
person or by agent or attorney.  Each application or appeal pertaining to one-,
two-, and three-family structures only shall be accompanied by cash or check
made payable to the City in the amount of $57.00, all other applications or
appeals shall be accompanied by cash or check made payable to the City in the
amount of $285.00. The Board shall not accept an application or appeal until
such payment is received.
      (Ord. 04-248.  Passed 8-10-04.)
   (d)   Adjournment of Hearing.  Upon the day for hearing any application or
appeal, the Board may adjourn the hearing to permit additional information to
be secured, or to cause such further notice as it deems proper to be served
upon such other property owners as it decides may logically be concerned with
such application or appeal.  In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons
previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time
of resumption of such hearing unless the Board so decides.
   (e)   Decisions of the Board.  The Board shall decide all applications and
appeals within 60 days after completion of the hearing thereon, and such
decision shall become effective upon certification of the resolution of the
Board. A certified copy of the Board's decision shall be transmitted to the
applicant or appellant. Such decision shall be binding upon the Director of
Community Development or his authorized representative and observed by him, and
he shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in the permit to the
applicant or appellant whenever a permit is authorized by the Board.  After the
Board, by resolution, certifies its approval on any application or appeal,
there shall be no further hearings upon such case.  However, when the Board
denies an application or appeal, a new application or appeal may be filed
subject to the same procedure as an original application or appeal.  If a new
application or appeal is filed within one (1) year of the date of the Board's
decision, the Secretary shall not schedule any hearing until the Board has
received the application or appeal and decided that there is new matter,
evidence or facts to be heard by the Board.
   (f)   Stay of Proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director of Community
Development or his authorized representative certifies to the Board, after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property.  In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may, on due cause shown, be granted by the Board after
notice to the Director of Community Development or his authorized
representative, or by judicial proceedings.
 
1172.04  INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CODE AND MAP.
   Upon appeal from a decision by the Director of Community Development or his
authorized representative, the Board shall have the power to decide any
question involving the interpretation of the Springfield Zoning Code text or
map, as follows:
   (a)   In case there is question as to the intended meaning of any provision
of the Springfield Zoning Code text, the Board may interpret its meaning as it
applies to a particular property. Before reaching a decision in response to any
request, the Board shall obtain the opinion of the City Director of Law
thereon.
   (b)   Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or as recorded
differs from the street and lot lines as shown on the Zoning Map, the Board,
after notice of public hearing to the owners of the property, shall interpret
the Map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this
Springfield Zoning Code for the particular section or district in question.  In
case of any question as to the location of any boundary line between districts,
an application for interpretation of the Zoning Map may be made to the Board
and a determination shall be made by such Board by following the procedure
established in Section
1172.04.
   (c)   Where a specific use is proposed that is not listed or provided for in
this Springfield Zoning Code, The Board of Zoning Appeals may make a
determination that the proposed use is substantially similar to a specific use
that is listed or provided for in the Springfield Zoning Code.  If the Board
finds that a use is substantially similar to a specific use listed in this
Springfield Zoning Code, the substantially similar use is deemed to be a
substantially similar permitted use in those districts where the specific use
is a permitted use, and a substantially similar conditional use in those
districts where the specific use is a conditionally permitted use.  In
formulating a determination that a proposed use is a substantially similar use,
the Board shall include in its written findings the reasoning upon which the
decision is based.  The following standards shall be considered by the Board
when making a determination that a use is substantially similar to a permitted
or a conditional use within a specific district:
      (1)   The compatibility of the proposed use with the general use
classification system as specified in this Springfield Zoning Code.
      (2)   The nature, predominant characteristics, and intensity of the
proposed use in relation to those uses specified by this Springfield Zoning
Code as being permitted, or in the case of a conditional use, conditionally
permitted in that district.
      (3)   The size, dimensional requirements, parking requirements, traffic
generation potential, and other regulatory considerations normally associated
with uses as specified in this Springfield Zoning Code.
   Should a use be determined to be substantially similar to a specific
permitted or conditionally permitted use provided for in this Springfield
Zoning Code, it shall then be permitted in the same manner and under the same
conditions and procedures as the use is permitted to which it has been found to
be substantially similar.  the Director of Community Development shall
maintain, as a public record, a listing of all uses which have been determined
to be substantially similar. For each such use the record shall include the use
as listed in the Springfield Zoning Code, the use unlisted in the Springfield
Zoning Code about which the determination of substantial similarity was made,
and the dates of any actions thereupon by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  This
record shall also contain the same information for all uses which have been
determined not to be substantially similar. The Director of Community
Development shall consult this record in the process of issuing zoning permits.
 
1172.05  CONDITIONAL USES.
   (a)   The Board shall have the power and original jurisdiction to hear and
decide, in accordance with the provisions of this Springfield Zoning Code,
applications, filed as hereinbefore provided, for conditional uses.
 
   (b)   Application.  Any person seeking a conditional use permit shall file a
written application on a form to be prescribed by the Director of Community
Development and in accordance with Section
1172.03 of the Springfield Zoning Code.  The application shall specify the
section of the Springfield Zoning Code under which the conditional use permit
is sought and may suggest, in a draft conditional use permit, such proposed
conditions as the applicant believes are necessary and sufficient to warrant
issuances of the conditional use permit applied for.  The application shall
include such evidence as is necessary and sufficient to demonstrate that
issuance of the applied for conditional use permit is warranted when the
standards identified in subdivision (c) of this Section are applied.  The
application shall include the following material, at a minimum:
      (1)   a site and development plan at an appropriate scale showing
proposed placement of structures on the subject property; provisions for
ingress and egress, offstreet parking and offstreet loading areas, and refuse
and service areas; and required yards and other open spaces;
      (2)   plans showing proposed locations for utility hook-ups;
      (3)   plans for proposed screening and buffering, if any, with reference
as to type, dimensions, and character;
      (4)   proposed landscaping; signs and exterior lighting, if any,
including type, dimensions, and character.
Where this Springfield Zoning Code places additional regulations on specific
conditional uses, the application should demonstrate that such requirements
will be met.
 
   (c)   In considering an application for a conditional use permit, the Board
shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and
structures, and the therewith of the proposed use and development.  Before
authorizing a use as a conditional use, the Board shall review the facts and
circumstances of each proposed conditional use in terms of the following
standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that the proposed
conditional use at the proposed location:
      (1)   Would not be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance
to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of noise, smoke, odor, vibration,
dust and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire and safety hazards,
sewage wastes and pollution, transportation and traffic, aesthetic and
psychological effects.  The Board shall use and give recognition to those
performance standards which are available in model codes or ordinances, or have
been developed by planning, manufacturing, health, architectural and
engineering organizations, and can be applied to the proposed use, to assist it
in reaching a fair and objective decision;
      (2)   Is in fact a conditional use as established under the provisions of
this Springfield Zoning Code as eligible to be permitted in the district
involved;
      (3)   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives, or with any specific objective of this Springfield Zoning Code;
      (4)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that the use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
      (5)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools, or that the persons
or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able
to provide adequately any such services;
      (6)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost
for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      (7)   Will have ingress and egress for the subject property which shall
be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding
public thoroughfares and which shall not be detrimental to vehicular and
pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case
of fire or catastrophe.
      (8)   Will locate offstreet parking, loading areas, refuse deposit
locations, service areas, utility hookup facilities, signs and exterior
lighting so as not be detrimental to vehicular and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
catastrophe and so as not to result in detrimental economic, noise, glare or
odor effects on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district.
 
   (d)   In considering the compatibility of the proposed conditional use with
all adjacent uses and structures, the Board shall give consideration to:
      (1)   The existing land use pattern;
      (2)   The impact of the proposed conditional use upon the load on public
facilities such as schools, utilities, and streets;
      (3)   Changed or changing conditions which find the proposed use to be
advantageous to the community and the neighborhood;
      (4)   The impact of the proposed use upon living conditions in the
neighborhood;
      (5)   The impact of proposed use upon traffic congestion and public
safety matters;
      (6)   The impact of the proposed use upon stormwater drainage;
      (7)   The impact of the proposed use upon light and air to adjacent
areas;
      (8)   The impact of the proposed use upon property values in the adjacent
area;
      (9)   The impact of the proposed use upon the improvement or development
of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations;
      (10)   The impact of the proposed use with regard to the scale of needs
of the neighborhood or the community.
 
   (e)   Upon authorizing a conditional use, the Board shall impose such
requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance
and operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this Springfield
Zoning Code for the particular conditional use, as the Board may deem necessary
for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest in
furtherance of the purpose of this Springfield Zoning Code.  The Board shall
issue written findings of fact and its written determination that the standards
specified in subdivision (c) of this Section, when applied to the conditional
use permit applied for, warrant issuance of the conditional use permit.
 
   (f)   If, upon consideration of the application and the applicant's evidence
submitted along with its application and after notice and a hearing held by the
Board (in accordance with Section
1172.03 of the Springfield Zoning Code) on the issuance of the applied for
conditional use permit, the Board is unable to find adequate evidence showing
that the proposed conditional use at the proposed location is warranted when
the standards specified in subdivision (c) of this Section are applied, then no
conditional use permit shall issue.  In denying issuance of a conditional use
permit, the Board shall issue written findings of fact and its written
determination that the standards specified in subdivision (c) of this Section
when applied to the conditional use permit applied for do not warrant issuance
of the conditional use permit.
 
   (g)   Repeated Applications.  No person shall file a second or subsequent
application for a conditional use permit for a particular parcel of property,
or part thereof, until the expiration of twelve (12) calendar months from the
date of denial of the initial conditional use permit applied for; unless, the
Board specifically waives the waiting period based upon a determination that
either:
      (1)   That the new application a proposes conditional use materially
different from the initial conditional use which was denied or
      (2)   That not waiving the waiting period will impose a substantial
hardship on the applicant resulting from the applicant's mistake or
inadvertence or
      (3)   That newly discovered matters warrant waiving the waiting period.
         (Ord. No. 06-236.  Passed July 3, 2006.)
 
1172.06  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases, filed as hereinbefore provided, such variances from the
provisions or requirements of this Springfield Zoning Code as will not be
contrary to the public interest and meet the standards for granting variances
established in this section, but in no other case.  Any application for a
variance which could be approved through rezoning to any other classification
shall not be approved as a variance, since this act would be equal to
rezoning.  No variances from the maximum permitted sign areas may be granted by
the Board.
   (a)   No variance from the strict application of any provision of this
Springfield Zoning Code which permits the use  of land which is prescribed or
which will result in a use of land in an manner inconsistent with the basic
character of the district in which such land is located, shall be granted by
the Board unless it finds that strict application of this Springfield Zoning
Code would result in unnecessary hardship.  The Board shall find unnecessary
hardship only when all the following facts and conditions exist:
      (1)   The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only
for a purpose allowed in the district.  To establish the inability of land to
yield a reasonable return, the owner must demonstrate factually, by dollars and
cents proof, an inability to realize a reasonable return under existing
permissible uses in the district.  An owner dose not suffer hardship sufficient
to warrant the granting of a variance simply because the land would be more
valuable or yield more profits if the variance were granted.  The requisite
degree of hardship exists only when the only permissible uses are not
economically feasible and strict application of the provisions or the
Springfield Zoning Code deprive the owner of economically viable use of the
land.
      (2)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances and not to
other general conditions in the neighborhood which may reflect the
unreasonableness of the Springfield Zoning Code itself.
      (3)   The use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood.
   (b)   No variance from the strict application of any provision of this
Springfield Zoning Code that does not involve the use of land which is
prescribed or which will result in a use of land in a manner inconsistent with
the basic character of the district in which such land is located shall be
granted by the board unless it finds that strict application of this
Springfield Zoning Code would result in practical difficulties which will
unreasonably deprive the owner of a permitted use of his property.  Such area
variances include, by way of example and not of limitation, relief from a set
back requirement, height requirement, restrictions on the bulk of buildings,
the extent of lot coverage or yard requirements. the Board shall consider and
weigh the following factors and such other factors as the board may determine
have a bearing on finding whether strict application of any provision of this
Springfield Zoning Code would result in practical difficulties which will
unreasonably deprive the owner of a permitted use of his property; however, no
one of such factors shall control in a determination of whether such practical
difficulty exists:
      (1)   The Property in question cannot yield a reasonable return and there
can be no beneficial use of the property without the variance, the variance
would  relieve a clearly demonstrable situation where strict application of the
provisions of this Springfield Zoning Code created a practical difficulty that
will deprive the owner of economically viable use of the land, as distinguished
from a special privilege or convenience to the owner.
      (2)   The variance is not substantial.
      (3)   The essential character of the neighborhood will not be
substantially altered or suffer a substantial detriment as a result of the
variance.
      (4)   The variance will not adversely affect the delivery of governmental
services such as police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and
solid waste regulation and disposal.
      (5)   The property owner purchased the property without knowledge of the
zoning restrictions.
      (6)   The property owner's predicament feasibly can be obviated through
some method other than granting a variance.
      (7)   The property possesses conditions involving irregular, narrow,
shallow or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions and because of
such exceptional physical conditions, strict application of a provision or
provisions of this Springfield Zoning Code would be unreasonable.
      (8)   The spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement will be
observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance.
 
1172.07  POWERS; EXERCISE AND EXTENT.
   In exercising its powers, the Board, in conformity with the provisions of
statute and this Springfield Zoning Code, may reverse or affirm wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Director of Community Development appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its judgment ought to be made, and
to that end shall have all powers of the office from which the appeal is
taken.  The Board shall have and shall be limited strictly to the powers and
duties prescribed by law and this Springfield Zoning Code.
 
1172.08  EXPIRATION OF AUTHORIZATIONS.
   Every authorized use or variation of the application of the literal
provisions of this Springfield Zoning Code allowed or granted, as provided in
this chapter shall expire and be of no force or effect after the expiration of
six (6) months from the date thereof, unless:
   (a)   The beneficiary of such variation or use shall have actually within
such period, put the subject property to the purpose for which such variation
or use shall have been granted or allowed.
   (b)   The Board at the time of the original grant or allowance of such
variation or use shall have granted a longer period, in which event the
expiration thereof shall be on the date specified by the Board, or
   (c)   The Board grants an extension of time at a later date.
 
 
 
TITLE NINE - IMPLEMENTATION
Chap.
1173.   Zoning Districts and Map
Chap.
1174.   Amendments to Code
Chap.
1175.   Annexations
Chap.
1176.   Zoning Certificates
Chap.
1177.   Enforcement and Penalty
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1173
Zoning Districts and Map
 
1173.01   Districts.
1173.02   Zoning map.
1173.03   Construction of the district boundaries.
1173.04   Interpretation of district boundaries.
 
1173.01  DISTRICTS.
   To classify, regulate and restrict the use and location of buildings
designed for specified uses; to regulate the bulk of buildings; to regulate and
determine the area and yards surrounding buildings; and to regulate and limit
the density of population, the city is divided into zoning districts.
 
1173.02  ZONING MAP.
   (a)   The boundaries of zoning districts are hereby established as shown on
the Zoning Map of Springfield, Ohio, herein referred to as the "map."  The map
shall be and is hereby made a part of this code.  The map and one (1)
reproduction shall both be dated and certified to be true and correct by the
President of the Commission.  The map shall be placed and remain on file in the
City Clerk's office in the form provided at the time of the passage of this
code.  One (1) certified true reproduction shall be maintained in the office of
the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
 
   (b)   Subsequent amendments to the map shall be recorded by filing the
amending ordinances together with schematic maps diagramming the effect of the
amendments on the original map.  The original map shall not be altered.
 
   (c)   The Community Development Department shall from time to time produce a
consolidated map reflecting all current changes, but this map and all
reproductions of this map will only be for reference and convenience and will
not be regarded as a part of this code.
 
   (d)   If, in the judgment of the City Clerk, the original map becomes
sufficiently worn or outdated to justify replacement, the City Commission may
direct that a new map be drawn reflecting all the then current amendments. 
This new map, after inspection by all members of the Commission, may be adopted
by ordinance as the new map.  One (1) copy of the new map shall be reproduced,
dated and certified to be true and correct by the President of the Commission
and shall then replace the original map.
 
1173.03  CONSTRUCTION OF THE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of various districts are shown on the zoning map accompanying
and made a part of this code.  The location of the boundaries shall be
determined according to the following general rules of construction:
   (a)   Boundaries of districts shown along public streets and alleys shall be
construed to be along the centerlines of such streets and alleys as they
existed at the time of the adoption the map.
   (b)   Boundaries of districts shown to be located approximately along lot
lines, shall be construed to be along the lot lines as they existed at the time
of the adoption of the map.
   (c)   Boundaries within separate tracts and within unsubdivided property,
shall be determined by use of the scale of the map.
 
1173.04  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The Director of Community Development or his designee shall interpret the
location of district boundary lines as they appear on the zoning map.  When
such interpretations are disputed, the location of the boundary lines shall be
determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals as prescribed in Chapter
1172.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1174
Amendments
 
1174.01   General.
1174.02   Planning Board action.
1174.03   Permit and certificate issued prior to amendment.
1174.04   Application for permit and certificate at time of amendment.
 
1174.01  GENERAL.
   (a)   The City Commission may from time to time on its own motion;
initiation by the Planning Board; or on petition by a person, amend the
boundaries of districts or regulations established in this code by adopting an
ordinance to supplement; change; modify or repeal them.
 
   (b)   To amend the districts and regulations established in this code,
applications shall be submitted on forms available from the City Clerk and
shall be accompanied with the following items:
      (1)   A plot plan of the petitioned property and all other properties
within 200 feet of the lands shall be submitted.
      (2)   The names and addresses of all property owners of the petitioned
property and those within 200 feet of any part of the petitioned property shall
be submitted. However, when ten (10) or more contiguous properties are joined
in one (1) petition by motion of the City Commission or instigation by the
Planning Board, the names and addresses of those of the petitioned properties
and those within 200 feet need not be.
      (3)   A written statement setting forth the reasons for amending the map
as petitioned shall be submitted.
      (4)   A filing fee of $285.00 shall be submitted.
         (Ord. 04-248.  Passed 8-10-04.)
      (5)   Such other documentation as may be necessary to process the
proposed amendment shall be submitted.
 
1174.02  PLANNING BOARD ACTION.
   (a)   An amendment by any person shall first be submitted to the Planning
Board for its recommendations and a report.  If the Planning Board does not
submit a report within 45 days of the filing date of the application, it shall
be considered to have submitted a report approving the proposed amendment. 
Applicants may waive this time limitation in writing.  Incomplete applications
are deemed to not have been properly filed.  The said 45-day time limitation
will begin to run once an application has been properly filed.  After the
recommendations and report of the Planning Board have been filed, the City
Commission shall before enacting any proposed amendment, hold a public hearing
on the proposed amendment, giving notice of the time and place of the hearing,
which notice shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the city at least 30 days before the public hearing.
(Ord. 03-288.  Passed 8-19-03.)
 
   (b)    The Planning Board may make recommendations and a report to the City
Commission for amendments to this code or map upon its own initiation.  If the
Planning Board initiates such recommendations and a report to the Commission,
said recommendations may be immediately set for public hearing following the
procedures generally prescribed for amendments to the code and map by the
Commission.
 
1174.03  PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE ISSUED PRIOR TO AMENDMENT.
   Nothing contained in this code shall require any change in building or
structure for a use for which a building permit and a zoning certificate, as
prescribed in Chapter
1176, had been legally granted before the amendment of the code and map. 
However, the construction of any building or structure shall commence within
six (6) months from the date the permit and the certificate are issued and be
completed prior to the expiration of the building permit.
 
1174.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE AT TIME OF AMENDMENT.
   If the establishment of a building, structure or use is contemplated that
would not be permitted because of the proposed amendment to the code or map, no
building permit and zoning certificate for the building, structure and use
shall be issued for a period of 60 days after the City Commission has set a
public hearing on the proposed amendment.  The permit and certificate shall be
subject to one of the following actions of the Commission:
   (a)   If within the 60 day period the Commission shall enact an ordinance
amending the code or map, the provisions of the code or map as amended shall
thereafter be in effect, and the building, structure and use for which a permit
or certificate is pending shall comply with the code or map as amended.
   (b)   If final action by the Commission has not been taken on the amendment
within 60 days of the time the matter is set for public hearing, the permit and
certificate shall be issued based upon the present code.
   (c)   If within the 60 day period the Commission does not receive a
sufficient number of votes for passage of the amendment, the suspension period
shall be terminated and the permit and certificate shall be issued based upon
the present code.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1175
Annexation
 
1175.01   Annexation.
 
1175.01  ANNEXATION.
   (a)   Upon annexation of land to the city, the zoning regulations then in
effect shall remain in full force, administered by the Director of Community
Development or his designee of the City, until the City Commission shall adopt
new regulations for such land.  Upon annexation of land to the city, the
provisions of Chapter
1127, Flood Plain Overlay District, shall also become effective for such land.
 
   (b)   The City Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding application
of the provisions of subsection (a) above to the new annexation prior to the
acceptance of the annexation.  The City Clerk shall cause notice of the public
hearing to be made pursuant to the provisions of Section 713.12 of the Ohio
Revised Code, as presently enacted or as it may be amended for time to time by
the general assembly.  Notice shall be made by the City Clerk so the required
public hearing may occur on the first day that the City Commission is permitted
to consider acceptance of the annexation in compliance with section 709.04 of
the Ohio Revised Code, as presently enacted and as it may be amended from time
to time by the general assembly.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1176
Zoning Certificates
 
1176.01   General.
1176.02   Zoning certificate required.
1176.03   Application for zoning certificate.
1176.04   Zoning certificate approval.
1176.05   Zoning certificate revocation.
1176.06   Establishment of a use to be approved.
1176.07   Expiration of zoning certificate.
1176.08   Record of zoning certificates.
 
1176.01  GENERAL.
   This chapter sets forth the procedures to be followed in obtaining zoning
certificates under this code.
 
1176.02  ZONING CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   No land or structure shall be used or converted nor a building permit issued
for the construction of a building or structure until a zoning certificate has
been issued by the Director of Community Development or his designee. Failure
to obtain a zoning certificate shall be a violation of this code.  The
certificate shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of this code
or the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, if applicable.  However, a
temporary certificate may be issued when a delay in the planting of trees is
warranted, as provided in Subsection
1158.01(d) and Paragraph
1161.02(h)(3) or a delay in the paving of parking and stacking spaces, drives
or aisles is warranted, as provided in Subsection
1153.01(g).
 
1176.03  APPLICATION FOR ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   An application shall be submitted for a zoning certificate and the applicant
shall attest that the information supplied in the application is true and
correct.  At a minimum, the application shall be accompanied with the following
items:
   (a)   Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
   (b)   Legal description of the property;
   (c)   Existing and proposed uses of the property;
   (d)   Zoning district of the proposed use;
   (e)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and
the shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing
buildings on the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of proposed
building(s) or alteration;
   (f)   Building heights;
   (g)   Number of off-street parking spaces or loading spaces and their
layout;
   (h)   Location and design of access drives;
   (i)   Number of dwelling units;
   (j)   Application for a sign permit;
   (k)   A filing fee of $25.00 if the zoning certificate pertains to a one-,
two-, or three-family structure or a filing fee of one percent of the cost of
the Building Permit in all other cases, but not less than $25.00; and
      (Ord. 04-248.  Passed 8-10-04.)
   (l)   Such other documentation as may be necessary to determine conformance
with this code.
 
1176.04  ZONING CERTIFICATE APPROVAL.
   Within five (5) working days after the receipt of the application for a
zoning certificate, the Community Development Director or his designee shall
either approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the provisions
of this code.  When plans are required, one copy of the plans shall be returned
to the applicant after the Director or his designee has marked such copy either
as approved or disapproved and so attested by his signature on the copy.  One
copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Director or his
designee.
 
1176.05  ZONING CERTIFICATE REVOCATION.
   The Community Development Director or his designee may issue a revocation
notice to revoke a zoning certificate that was issued contrary to the code
based upon false information or misrepresentation in the application.  Written
notice of such revocation shall be given to the person holding the certificate
together with notice that further work, as described in the canceled
certificate, shall not proceed unless and until a new certificate has been
obtained or an extension granted.
 
1176.06  ESTABLISHMENT OF A USE TO BE AS APPROVED.
   A use shall be established on the basis of the application and plans
approved with a zoning certificate by the Community Development Director or his
designee.  Any use established contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this code.
 
1176.07  EXPIRATION OF ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   If the work described in any zoning certificate has not been completed
within the time specified, the certificate shall expire.  The certificate shall
be revoked by the Community Development Director or his designee according to
the procedures prescribed in Section
1176.05 above.
 
1176.08  RECORD OF ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   The Community Development Director or his designee shall maintain a record
of all zoning certificates, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any
person.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1177
Enforcement
 
1177.01   Compliance required.
1177.02   Complaints regarding violations.
1177.03   Entry and inspection of property.
1177.04   Notice of violations.
1177.05   Violation citation tags.
1177.99   Penalties and fines.
 
1177.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as specifically allowed elsewhere in this code:
   (a)   No person shall use land except for a purpose permitted in the
district in which it is located.
   (b)   No person shall erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, move or
structurally alter any building, nor shall any person use any building, except
for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located.
   (c)   No person shall erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, move or
structurally alter any building, nor shall any person use any building, except
in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building
is located.
   (d)   No person shall erect or enlarge any building except in conformity
with the off-street parking and loading requirements of this Springfield Zoning
Code.
   (e)   No person owning a building at the time of passage of this Springfield
Zoning Code or who hereafter erects or structurally alters a building, shall
cause or permit such building to encroach upon the minimum yards, frontage,
parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this
Springfield Zoning Code nor shall any lot area be reduced below the
requirements of this Springfield Zoning Code for the district in which such lot
is located.
      (Ord. 02-177.  Passed 4-16-02.)
   (f)   No person shall erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, move or
structurally alter any building as to cause the minimum yards, frontage, or
parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this
Springfield Zoning Code for such building to encroach upon any part of the
yards, frontage, parking space or open spaces, including lot area per family,
required by this Springfield Zoning Code for any other building.
 
1177.02  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this Springfield Zoning Code occurs or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint.  Such complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Community
Development Director or his designee.  He shall properly record such complaint,
investigate such complaint, and take action as provided by this Springfield
Zoning Code.
 
1177.03  ENTRY AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTY.
   The Community Development Director or his designee is authorized to make
inspections of properties and structures for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this Springfield Zoning Code.  Prior to seeking entry to any
property or structure for such examination or survey, he shall attempt to
obtain the permission of  the owner or occupant to inspect the property or
structure.  If such permission is denied or cannot be obtained, he shall
request the assistance of the City Law Director in securing a valid search
warrant prior to entry.
 
1177.04  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   Whenever the Community Development Director or his designee determines
that there is a violation of any provision of this code, a warning shall be
issued and shall serve as a notice of the violation.  Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Identify the violation;
      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued
and refer to the sections of this Springfield Zoning Code being violated; and
      (4)   State the time by which the violation shall be corrected.
 
   (b)  Service of notice of violation shall be as follows:
      (1)  By personal delivery to the person or persons responsible, or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of residence of the owner with a person
of suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   By certified mail deposited in the United State Post Office
addressed to the person or persons responsible at a last known address;
      (3)   If a certified mail envelope is returned with endorsement showing
that the envelope is unclaimed, then service shall be sent by ordinary mail,
and the mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Service shall
be deemed complete when the fact of mailing is entered of record, provided the
ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery; or
       (4)    By posting a copy of the notice form in a conspicuous place on 
the premises found in violation.
 
1177.05  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS. 
   The Community Development Director or his designee is authorized and
directed to provide inspectors with citation tags which may be used for the
purpose of giving due notice and summons to the person responsible for
violations of this Springfield Zoning Code by the following procedure:
   (a)   Each citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the section of the chapter violated, and
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place.
   (b)  The citation tag shall be served on such person in person.  However, a
citation tag shall be deemed to be properly served upon such person if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the property affected.
   (c)     If a registered or certified mail envelope is returned with an
endorsement showing that service was refused or unclaimed, the notice may be   
  served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address, residence, or
place of business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing,
and service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing, provided the
ordinary mailing envelope is not returned from the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery.
   (d)   Alternatively:
      (1)   The citation tag may be served by leaving it at his last known
residence or place of business in the presence of a family member or other
responsible person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
general nature of the contents thereof; or
      (2)  If service is not accomplished by any of the above means, then a
notification of the existence of the citation tag may be published at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation.
   (e)    The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of
appearing at the time and place stated, he may, within the stated time, sign a
plea of guilty and a waiver of trial and pay a stated fine and stated costs, if
any. (f)  When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for his arrest.
   (f)     When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed according to criminal procedures.
   (g)     The citation tag as herein provided, shall be sufficient notice,
summons, and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
 
1177.99  PENALTIES AND FINES.
   (a)    It shall be unlawful to erect, establish, locate, construct,
reconstruct, enlarge, change, convert, move, repair, maintain or structurally
alter any building, structure or land in violation of any provisions of this
Springfield Zoning Code or any amendment thereto.  Any person who violates this
Springfield Zoning Code or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
upon conviction be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and be fined not more than 100
dollars and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. 
Each day such violation continues after receipt of a violation notice shall be
considered a separate offense.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure,
premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
 
   (b)   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to abolish, impair or
prevent other additional remedies as provided by law.  In the event of a
violation of any provision or requirement of this Springfield Zoning Code, or
in the case of an imminent threat of such a violation, the City Law Director or
the owner of any neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such
violation, may, in addition to other recourses provided by law, institute
mandamus, injunction, abatement or other appropriate actions to prevent,
remove, enjoin or terminate such violation.
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART TWELVE - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
 
(Amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 05-06, passed January 18, 2005)
 
TITLE ONE - Subdivision Regulations
Chap.   
1201.   Introduction; Definitions.
Chap.   
1203.   Design Standards and Requirements.
Chap.   
1205.   Procedure for Subdividing.
Chap.   
1207.   Utility Transition Areas.
Chap.   
1209.   Commercial-Industrial Plats.
Chap.   
1211.   Improvements; Standards and Specifications.
Chap.   
1213.   Plan Approval Procedure.
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART TWELVE--SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TITLE ONE - Subdivision Regulations
Chap.
1201.   Introduction; Definitions.
Chap.
1203.   Design Standards and Requirements.
Chap.
1205.   Procedure for Subdividing.
Chap.
1207.   Utility Transition Areas.
Chap.
1209.   Commercial-Industrial Plats.
Chap.
1211.   Improvements; Standards and Specifications.
Chap.
1213.   Plan Approval Procedure.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1201
Introduction; Definitions
 
1201.01   Purpose.
1201.02   Authority.
1201.03   Zoning.
1201.04   Divisions of land not subject to these regulations.
1201.05   Jurisdiction.
1201.06   Interpretation.
1201.07   Enforcement.
1201.08   Variances.
1201.09   Adoption.
1201.10   Amendment.
1201.11   Definitions.
1201.12   Additional PD district subdivision regulations.
1201.99   Penalty.
 
1201.01  PURPOSE.
   The rules and regulations contained in this
Title One, Part Twelve, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield,
Ohio, are adopted to provide an adequate urban pattern by allocating sufficient
and convenient open areas for traffic, utilities, recreation, light, air and
the avoidance of congestion of population.
 
1201.02  AUTHORITY.
   The City Planning Board is authorized to adopt rules and regulations
governing plats and subdivisions of land within its jurisdiction by virtue of
Chapter 711.09 and 711.101 of the Ohio Revised Code.  A regional planning
commission established by exercise of the City Planning Board's powers and
having jurisdiction within a territory governed by a Cooperative Economic
Development Agreement, entered into pursuant to Section 701.07 of the Ohio
Revised Code, is authorized to adopt rules and regulations governing plats and
subdivisions of land within its jurisdiction by virtue of Chapter 711.09 and
711.101 of the Ohio Revised Code.  Lands within the corporate boundaries of the
City and which are not included within the jurisdiction of a regional planning
commission, established by exercise of the City Planning Board's powers for a
territory governed by a Cooperative Economic Development Agreement, entered
into pursuant to Section 701.07 of the Ohio Revised Code, are lands subject to
the jurisdiction of the City Planning Board.
 
1201.03  ZONING.
   A proposed subdivision located in a zoned area shall conform to the zoning
rules except as specified in Section
1201.06.
 
1201.04  JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall be applicable to all divisions hereinafter made of
land located within the corporate limits of Springfield, Ohio, into two or more
lots, parcels, or sites for building.
 
1201.05  DIVISIONS OF LAND NOT SUBJECT TO THESE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The subdivision of land whereby all parcels contain more than five (5)
acres and new streets or easements of access are not involved.
 
   (b)   The exchange of parcels of land between adjoining land owners, whereby
the original parcel is not reduced below the requirements of zoning or these
regulations and a new building site is not created as defined by Section
1201.05(a) above.
 
1201.06  INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be minimum
requirements.  Variances may be granted in accordance with Section
1201.08.  Whenever these provisions are different from the requirements of
other lawfully adopted regulations or current local health and safety
standards, the more restrictive or higher standard shall prevail.  The word
"may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
 
1201.07  ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Planning Board and its staff, together with
other appropriate City officers, to enforce these regulations in the
jurisdictional limits as set forth previously in Section
1201.02 and
1201.04.
 
1201.08  VARIANCES.
   Variances may be granted in the regulations set forth herein by the Planning
Board if it deems such action essential in view of unusual topographic
conditions or other special circumstances, provided, however, that any variance
being requested does not conflict with the general purpose and intent of these
regulations.  Before reaching a decision on variances from regulations
involving streets, utilities, or drainage prescribed herein or in Chapter
931, Engineering Regulations, Public Infrastructure Improvements, the Planning
Board shall obtain the recommendation of the Director of the Department of
Community Development thereon.  When the Planning Board's decision differs from
the recommendation of the Director of the Department of Community Development,
the final determination shall be made by the Commission.  To secure a variance,
the applicant shall make a written request to the Planning Board explaining
fully the reasons therefor and submit same with the Phase I plan, defined in
Section
1205.02(c) and
1205.02(d), or as soon as possible after Phase I submission.  Action by the
Planning Board on such a request will be taken as part of general action on the
Phase I plan.
 
1201.09  ADOPTION.
   These regulations shall be effective after the necessary public hearings,
adoption by the Planning Board, the approval by the City Commission, and
certification to the Recorder of Clark County.
 
1201.10  AMENDMENT.
   These regulations may be amended in accordance with the same procedure as
stated in Section
1201.09.
 
1201.11  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings given herein.
   (a)   (1)   "Alley" means a public right-of-way thirty (30) feet or less in
width.
   (b)   (1)   "Block" means a parcel of land bounded on all sides by a street
or streets.
      (2)   "Building setback line" means a line indicating the minimum
horizontal distance between the street right-of-way and any building or
projection thereof, excluding steps and unroofed porches.  In cases where the
proposed width of a street as set forth in the Thoroughfare Plan differs from
that of the existing street, the building setback line shall be measured from
the proposed street right-of-way line if said right-of-way is fixed and
documented.
   (c)   (1)   "CEDA Planning Commission" means a regional planning commission
established by exercise of the City Planning Board's powers for a territory
within the corporate boundaries of the City governed by a Cooperative Economic
Development Agreement entered into pursuant to Section 701.07 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
      (2)   "City Planning Board" means the City Planning Board of the City of
Springfield, Ohio.
      (3)   "Clark County Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of
Clark County, Ohio.
      (4)   "Comprehensive Master Plan" means the long-range plan adopted and
as amended from time to time by the boards and commissions involved, which plan
provides for the general location of the principle streets, parks, zoning
districts, schools and other public buildings, and any other long-range aspects
of physical planning.
      (5)   "County Commission" means the elected legislative body for the
unincorporated area of Clark County, Ohio.
      (6)   "County engineer" means the Engineer of Clark County.
      (7)   "Crosswalk" means a ten-foot public right-of-way which cuts across
a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
      (8)   "Cul-de-sac" means a minor street having one end permanently
terminated by a vehicular turnaround with the other end opening into another
street and having no intersection with any other street between such ends.
   (d)   (1)   "Dead-end street" means a street right-of-way having only one
(1) outlet for motor traffic and not containing a vehicular turnaround.
      (2)   "Developers" means any person iwho constructs or contracts to
construct improvements on subdivided land.
      (3)   "Director" means the Director of the Department of Community
Development of the City.
   (e)   (1)   "Engineer" means an individual authorized to practice civil
engineering as defined by Occupations--Professions of the State of Ohio, due to
his registration in said state.
   (f)   (1)   "Fixed and documented" means a boundary, feature, or dimension
of a right-of-way proposed by the Thoroughfare Plan shall be fixed and
documented when final engineering plans showing or indicating such boundary,
feature, or dimension are completed and the actual centerline survey showing or
indicating such boundary, feature, or dimension is recorded, either in the
County Recorder's Office or is established in the journal of the director of
the Ohio Department of Transportation.
      (2)   "Flood areas" mean those districts flooded in the 1913, 1929 and/or
1959 flood.
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   Reserved.
   (i)   (1)   "Improvements" mean street pavements; curb and gutter; walks;
sanitary, storm, and water mains; and any other appropriate items.
      (2)   "Inspection fee" means the fee paid by the subdivider or developer
to the City for inspecting the construction of improvements. The above may be
modified by the existence and/or adoption of a utility extension policy.
   (j)   Reserved.
   (k)   (1)   "Key map" means a drawing at a reduced scale located on the
final map, which shows enough of the general area around the subdivision in
question so as to locate said subdivision.  The key map shall include one state
highway and, when possible, the intersection of two state highways.
   (l)   (1)   "Land Use Plan" means the long-range plan for the desirable use
of land as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the City’s
boards and commissions involved in land use planning within the City.  The
purpose of such plan, among other purposes, is to serve as a guide in the
zoning and in the progressive changes in the zoning of land to meet changing
community need in the appropriate subdividing and development of undeveloped
land and in the acquisition of rights-of-way or sites for such public
facilities as streets, parks, schools, and/or public buildings.
      (2)   "Lot" means a piece, parcel, or tract of land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and
accessory buildings or utilized for a principle use and uses accessory thereto,
together with the required open spaces and having frontage on a public street.
      (3)   "Lot corner" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the
same street forming an interior angle of less than on hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees.
      (4)   "Lot interior" means a lot other than a corner lot.
   (m)   (1)   "Major traffic artery" means a street which is designated as a
primary or secondary thoroughfare on the Thoroughfare Plan or any street of
equal importance as designated by the Planning Board and/or Clark County
Planning Commission with the concurrence of the Service Director and/or the
County Engineer.
      (2)   "Manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  It
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
      (3)   "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or for sale.  This definition shall exclude any manufactured home park as
defined in Section 3733.01 of the Ohio Revised Code over which the public
health council has exclusive rule-making power.
      (4)   "Map" means the scaled representation of a parcel of land or a
subdivision.
      (5)   "Multi-family" means involving three or more dwelling units in one
structure.
   (n)   (1)   "Neighborhood pattern" means an urban pattern of development
based upon the neighborhood unit concept.
      (2)   "Neighborhood plan" means a neighborhood unit pre-designed prior to
the subdivision of most of the land area for purposes of indicating the general
location of the different land uses and streets.
      (3)   "Neighborhood unit" means an area of land urban in character and
bounded, but not traveled, by major traffic arteries or other barriers,
resulting in a distinct entity of such size and density as to contain its own
school, churches, shopping district, and recreation area.
   (o)   Reserved.
   (p)   (1)   "Performance bond" means an agreement between a developer and a
bonding company in favor of the City of Springfield for 100 percent of the
amount of the estimated cost of construction guaranteeing the completion of
physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time
limit prescribed a plat agreement entered into between a subdivider and the
City.
      (2)   "Planning Board" means the City Planning Board or CEDA Planning
Commission which has jurisdiction over the subject territory.
      (3)   "Plat" means a scaled map showing the subdivision or an area which
has been or is about to be subdivided.
      (4)   “Public Utility” means any entity which provides essential products
or services to the public with the characteristic of service to, or readiness
to serve, an indefinite public which has a legal right to demand and receive
the entity's products or services and which conducts its operations in such a
manner as to be a matter of public concern [See, A & B Refuse Disposers, Inc.
v. Board of Ravenna Township Trustees (1992), 64 Ohio State 3d 385].
   (q)   Reserved.
   (r)   (1)   "Regulations" means Subdivision Regulations for The City of
Springfield, Ohio, as set forth in Part Twelve, Title One of the Codified
Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
      (2)   "Reserves" means parcels of land within a subdivision that are
intended for a future designated use.
      (3)   "Right-of-way" means that area between lines designating the extent
to which the public is entitled to use for purposes of access either by
dedication or easement.  The street right-of-way shall be the lines which are
existing or those proposed per the Thoroughfare Plan and Section
1203.02.
   (s)   (1)   "Staff" means a group of individuals assisting and advising the
Planning Board within the realm of planning.
      (2)   "Street" means a public right-of-way 50 feet or more in width which
provides a public means of access to abutting property or any such right-of-way
30 feet in width or more provided it existed prior to February, 1968.  The term
street includes avenue, drive, circle, road, lane, court, parkway, boulevard,
highway, thoroughfare, or any other similar term.
      (3)   "Street, collector" means a public right-of-way which carries
traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways
including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and
streets for circulation within such a development.
      (4)   "Street, major and secondary" means an officially designated
Federal or State numbered highway or any other street designated as a major or
secondary thoroughfare on the most current Land Use Plan or Comprehensive Plan
map.
      (5)   "Street, marginal access" means a minor street which is generally
parallel and contiguous to an expressway, freeway, parkway or other major
street and is so designed as to intercept, collect, and distribute traffic
desiring to cross, enter, or leave such traffic artery and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
      (6)   "Streets, minor" means public streets which are used primarily for
access to the abutting properties.
      (7)   "Street, special" means a public thoroughfare designated for a
particular use, such as serving apartment areas, and not classified within the
street groupings as listed in this section.
      (8)   "Subdivider" means any person or persons or duly authorized agent
of such person or persons who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in
Section
1201.11(s)(9).
      (9)   "Subdivision" means:
         A.   the division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that
the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not
involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of
parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not
create additional building sites shall be exempted; or
         B.   the improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the
division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners,
occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of
public sewer, water, storm drainage or public facilities.
      (10)   "Subdivision technical review agencies" means agencies comprised
of the Planning Board's staff and the following review agencies (as
applicable):
         A.   County
         B.   Public Works
         C.   Clark County Combined Health
         D.   Sanitary Engineer
         E.   Soil and Water Conservation District
         F.   and others as required
      (11)   "Surveyor" means a registered surveyor as defined by the
Registration Act of the State of Ohio.
   (t)   (1)   "Test hole" means excavations of the earth's crust ten foot in
length and approximately two feet wide and ten feet deep.
      (2)   "Thoroughfare Plan" means the official Thoroughfare Plan as
adopted, and as amended from time to time by the Planning Board, defining the
location and actual and/or proposed right-of-way widths of freeways, primary
arterials, and secondary arterials in the City.  The Thoroughfare Plan is on
file with the staff members in the office of the Planning Board.
   (u)   (1)   "Unplatted subdivision (lotsplit)" means the division of a
parcel of land along an existing public street, not involving the opening,
widening, or extension of any street or road, and involving no more than five
(5) lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided.
      (2)   "Urban area" means:
         A.   A proposed subdivision shall be considered to be in a potentially
urban area if one or both of the following conditions exist:
            (i)   If the proposed subdivision is located in an area which
contains 25 lots or more, either proposed or existing and proposed, all of
which lie within the bounds of a circle, the center of which is located near
the center of the proposed subdivision and has a radius of 700 feet or less or
as in the case of a one street linear development where the 25 lots will face
upon a street within a lineal distance of 2,500 feet.  Measurement of a one-
street linear development will begin in the center of the proposed development
and extend for a distance of 1,250 feet each side of center.
            (ii)   If the subdivision is located in an area designated by the
Planning Board as a utility transition area.
      (3)   "Utility Easement" means a grant by the owner of land for the
benefit of the City and the benefit of public utilities for the construction,
reconstruction, operation and maintenance of infrastructure (including ditches)
for the City’s municipal water, sewer, storm water management, energy,
telecommunications, data transmission and other essential products and services
needed by the public and for services provided by public utilities.
      (4)   "Utility transition area" means any area indicated on the Land Use
Plan designated for and future residential use at population densities
requiring the provision of public water supply and public sanitary sewage
disposal, but which lacks one or both of such utility services.  A utility
transition area may also be designated by the Planning Board, when in their
opinion, the provision of one or both of the above-mentioned utility services
are assured within a reasonable length of time.
 
1201.12  ADDITIONAL PD DISTRICT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   Subdivision regulations which are imposed in a PD Ordinance adopted under
Chapter
1140 of the Codified Ordinances will be in addition to the regulations imposed
under
Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances and, to the extent subdivision
regulations imposed in such PD Ordinance vary from the subdivision regulations
in Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances, the subdivision regulations imposed
in the PD Ordinance shall supersede the subdivision regulations in
Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 06-235. Passed 6-27-06.)
 
1201.99  PENALTY.
   Any violations of Chapter 711 of the Ohio Revised Code or of these
regulations is subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 711 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1203
Design Standards and Requirements
 
1203.01   Conformity.
1203.02   Streets.
1203.03   Lots.
1203.04   Blocks.
1203.05   Utility easements.
1203.06   Alleys.
1203.07   Trees.
1203.08   Suitability of land.
1203.09   Flood plain requirements.
 
1203.01  CONFORMITY.
   Every proposed residential subdivision shall conform to a neighborhood-type
urban pattern.  The specific area plan together with the Comprehensive Master
Plan for the City of Springfield and Clark County, shall be adhered to if, as,
and when adopted.
   (a)   Drainage.  The subdivider shall provide the necessary means to assure
proper drainage as determined by the City Engineer.
   (b)   Drainage Easements or Rights-of-Way.  A utility easement shall be
provided on both sides of a storm drainage closed system or open course, for
the purpose of replacing, widening, deepening, or general maintenance.  The
minimum width of a utility easement carrying storm water shall be twenty (20)
feet.  In the case of large drainage ways, or ditches, the Service Director or
Planning Board may require a drainage right-of-way if a utility easement is
deemed inadequate and/or too much of the lot would be utilized for drainage
purposes.
   (c)   Major Drainage Areas.  Subdivisions located in major drainage areas
shall be improved so as to render the area substantially safe for the desired
use.
 
1203.02  STREETS.
   (a)   Pattern.  The pattern of streets shall conform to the Thoroughfare
Plan of either the City or the County and with the provisions of these
regulations.  Within the boundaries of the plat, the following provisions
pertaining to streets shall be adhered to:
      (1)   The necessary right-of-way for widening or extension of all
existing thoroughfares and for proposed thoroughfares as indicated by the
Thoroughfare Plan involved, when the right-of-way width as proposed by the
Thoroughfare Plan is fixed and documented, shall be dedicated provided the
width to be dedicated need not exceed fifty (50) feet measured from the
centerline of the right-of-way.
      (2)   When a subdivision involves land fronting on an existing county or
township road not designated on the Thoroughfare Plan as of equal or greater
importance than a secondary street, a reasonable provision shall be made for
the necessary right-of-way for traffic, utilities and drainage.
      (3)   When, in the opinion of the Planning Board, one or more streets
serving a multi-family development act as traffic collectors, they shall
conform to the standards for a collector street as designated in Section
1211.02, Table 2.
 
   (b)   Continuity.  The street pattern shall make provisions for the
continuance of streets into adjacent vacant properties, and for the connection
to the proper existing right-of-way in adjacent developed areas.  Using the end
width of an existing street as frontage shall, therefore, be prohibited.
 
   (c)   Cul-de-Sac.  The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be five hundred
(500) feet measured from the middle of the turnaround or more particularly the
point of radius to the near edge of the intersecting right-of-way with the
following exceptions for subdivisions located in single-family zoning
districts:
      (1)   When all lots fronting upon the cul-de-sac have at least 8712
square feet of lot area, a cul-de-sac having a length of not more than 700 feet
may be permitted provided Sections
1203.01(a) and
1203.02(b) are not.
      (2)   When all lots fronting upon the cul-de-sac have at least 15,000
square feet of lot area and when all such lots except those having at least 80
percent of their frontage on the turnaround, having one hundred (100) feet or
more of frontage, a cul-de-sac having a length of not more than 900 feet may be
permitted; provided Sections
1203.01(a) and
1203.02(b) are not violated.  Within the turnaround, the minimum right-of-way
radius shall be fifty (50) feet. The street surface requirements for dead-end
streets shall be as set forth in Section
1211.02(a)(3).
 
   (d)   Half or Partial Streets and Alleys.  Dedication of half-streets shall
be discouraged.  Where a half-street or half-alley exists adjacent to the tract
to be subdivided, the other half-street shall be platted if deemed necessary by
the Planning Board.  The improvements on half-streets shall be as set forth in
Section
1211.01(d).
 
   (e)   Intersections.  Streets shall intersect one another at ninety (90)
degrees or as near to ninety (90) degrees as possible.  The curb radius
requirements are set forth in Section
1211.02(a)(2).  The property lines shall be rounded with a radius of fifteen
(15) feet or greater if the City Engineer deems it necessary.
 
   (f)   Jogs.  Street intersection jogs of less than one hundred and twenty-
five (125) feet measured from street centerline to street centerline shall be
discouraged.
 
   (g)   Approaches.  The approach to an intersection shall be perpendicular or
as close to right angles as possible to the intersecting street for a distance
of at least fifty (50) feet measured from the closer right-of-way line of the
intersecting street for minor streets and one hundred (100) feet measured from
the closer right-of-way line of the intersecting street for all other streets. 
Whenever a street intersects another street on a curve, the Director shall
determine if it is an acceptable intersection.
 
   (h)   Names.  The names of new streets shall not duplicate existing street
names, except where a street is extended, or when the new right-of-way is in
alignment with an existing one.  All new streets shall be named as follows:
 
 
General Direction                    
North and South                     Street
East and West                       Avenue
Diagonal                            Road
Curving                             Drive
Dead-end (North and South)          Lane
Dead-end (East and West)            Court
Circular street or any part thereof Circle
 
   (g)   Width.  The width of a street shall be as specified in Section
1201.11(s)(2).
 
1203.03  LOTS.
   (a)   Frontage.  Except as provided below, all lots must have frontage on a
public street other than a controlled or limited access street.  The end width
of an existing street shall not be used as frontage as stated in Section
1203.02(b).  A parcel of land which was sold on land contract without street
frontage prior to 1970 may now be subdivided without street frontage, provided
the parcel has access to a public street over a perpetual access easement.
 
   (b)   Minimum Lot Size. Minimum lot sizes in zoned areas, where public and/
or community sewer and water is to be utilized shall be as specified in the
appropriate zoning code.  Lot sizes in zoned areas where sewer, either public
and/or community, is not available, shall be as specified below.  Minimum lot
sizes in areas that are not zoned shall be as specified in Table 1 found in
this section.  In certain areas where the Planning Board and the City
Commission, when involved, deem it necessary, the minimum requirement set forth
in Table 1, Column A, found in this section for single-family dwellings may be
varied in recognition of an established need for low-cost housing, provided the
minimum requirements of the Zoning Code applying to a given tract of land shall
be adhered to.
 
   (c)   Maximum Lot Size.  No lot shall have a depth which is more than four
(4) times its width.  In case of a lot not having a uniform width, "width" as
used in the preceding sentence shall mean the average of the greatest and least
width of such lot.  This provision shall not apply to a lot which has an area
of more than five (5) acres, has a minimum lot width of 150 feet, and meets all
the other requirements of the zoning ordinance and the subdivision regulations.
 
   (d)   Utility Transition Area.  If the subdivider chooses to provide water
and sewer services in the manner set forth in Section
1211.01 (i), minimum lot size and width shall be as noted in Section
1203.03, Table 1, Column A.  If the subdivider chooses to provide temporary
water supply and sewage disposal on each individual lot, such lots may be
platted in such a manner that in the future each lot may be split into two or
more parts, each of which contains the necessary area and frontage as specified
in Section
1203.03, Table 1, Column A.  The original lot shall have a minimum frontage and
lot area as specified in Section
1203.03, Table 1, Column B.  The procedure for platting lots in the
aforementioned manner is set forth in Chapter
1207.
 
   (e)   Corner Lots.  In areas where sewer and water are available the minimum
width as measured across the least width of the lot at the building line shall
be 85 feet.
 
   (f)   Double Frontage. Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be
prohibited except when the size of the tract, topography, or other
circumstances are such that development of the tract without double frontage
lots would be impracticable as determined by the Planning Board or when the
Planning Board requires them in order for lots adjoining a major traffic artery
to have frontage on a minor street in the proposed subdivision.  In either of
such cases, the right-of-way boundary of the minor street shall constitute the
front of any such lots.  There shall be no right-of-vehicular access across the
rear property line.  Such prohibition of vehicular access shall be expressed on
the plat, and a release and relinquishment of said right-of-access to the
political subdivision having control of such major traffic artery shall be
incorporated in the dedication section of the record plan.  The minimum depth
for a double frontage lot shall be 150 feet.
 
   (g)   Lot Lines.  Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to
the street, or radial to curved streets.  Curved side or rear lot lines shall
not be permitted.
 
   (h)   Shape.  All lots when possible, shall be rectangular in shape.
Triangular-shaped lots shall be discouraged.
 
   (i)   Setbacks.  Minimum building setback requirements shall be as required
in the appropriate zoning code.  In unzoned areas, minimum setback requirements
shall be as specified below.  All required minimum building setback lines for
front yards shall be measured from the nearer edge of the existing or proposed,
if applicable, right-of-way.
      (1)   Residential Lots.  The minimum building setback line shall be 30
feet.  The minimum building setback on the side street of a corner lot shall be
25 feet.
      (2)   Business or Industrial Lots.  The minimum front setback line on a
business or industrial lot shall be 25 feet.  The minimum building setback on
the side street of a corner lot shall be 20 feet.
      (3)   Exceptions.  When the minimum required setback line is greater than
that established by existing buildings on contiguous lots on the same street,
corner lots excepted, there may be a gradual transition at the rate of two-and-
one-half feet or more per lot from the existing to the new.  However, on
residential lots the minimum setback shall not be less than 15 feet.
1203.04  BLOCKS.
   (a)   The length, width, and shape of a block shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
      (1)   Provisions for an adequate number of building sites which contain
the necessary area for the particular need and use intended as specified by
these regulations and any involved zoning regulations.
      (2)   The need for convenient access, circulation control, and safety of
street traffic.
      (3)   The limitation of topography.
 
   (b)   Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length.  A crosswalk, the right-
of-way of which shall not be less than ten feet, shall be required, if in the
opinion of the Planning Board and Commission, when involved, this facility is
necessary.
 
1203.05  UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   Utility easements shall be of such location and width as determined by the
City and utility companies.  Utility easements shall include those easements
required at the time of platting by the City for drainage and/or utility lines
and shall be of such location and width as requested by the proper authority. 
The final plat shall not be signed for recording until approval of all utility
easements has been verified by the utility companies and/or the City.  Any
change from the map as approved by the utility companies and/or the City that
alters any utility easement shall be subject to reapproval before signing the
final plat.
 
1203.06  ALLEYS.
   (a)   Alleys Prohibited in Dwelling House Areas.  Alleys shall not be
permitted in dwelling house districts unless there are unusual circumstances
which make alleys necessary.
 
   (b)   Alleys Required in Certain Districts.  Alleys may be required in areas
deemed necessary by the Planning Board after review and comments from the
appropriate City departments.
 
   (c)   Width of Alleys.  The minimum width for an alley shall be twenty (20)
feet.
 
   (d)   Intersection and Alignment.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in
alignment shall be avoided.  The corners of intersecting alleys shall be cut
off by a line connecting two points which are located along the alley lines ten
feet back from the intersection.
 
   (e)   Dead-End Alleys.  Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted unless
considered necessary by the Planning Board and Commission, when involved.
 
1203.07  TREES.
   Where necessary, all existing trees shall be removed from the street right-
of-way.  Trees, when planted, shall be located outside any utility easement and
planted in such a manner as not to impair visibility at any corner.  It is
recommended that all subdividers or developers salvage as many acceptable
existing trees as possible.
 
1203.08  SUITABILITY OF LAND.
   If the Planning Board finds that land proposed to be subdivided is
unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage,
unsuitable soil conditions, topography, inadequate water supply, schools,
transportation facilities, or other such conditions which may endanger health,
life, or property; and if from investigations conducted by the health agencies
concerned, it is determined that in the best interest of the public, the land
should not be developed for the purpose proposed, the Planning Board shall not
approve the land for subdivision unless adequate methods are adopted by the
subdivider for solving the problems that will be created by the development of
the land.
 
1203.09  FLOOD PLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.  Base flood elevation
data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals, including manufactured
home subdivisions.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1205
Procedure for Subdividing
 
1205.01   Subdivisions involving five lots or less.
1205.02   Subdivisions involving five lots or more.
 
1205.01  SUBDIVISIONS INVOLVING FIVE LOTS OR LESS.
   (a)   A proposed division of a parcel of land shown as a unit on the tax
roll (duplicate) as of October 30, 1972, may be submitted to the Planning
Board's staff for approval without a plat if the proposed division of a parcel
of land meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The proposed division is located along (fronts upon) an existing
public road other than a controlled or limited access road and involves no
opening, widening, or extension of any street or road.
      (2)   No more than five (5) lots are involved after the original parcel
has been completely subdivided.
      (3)   The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable platting,
subdividing, or zoning regulations.
      (4)   The property has been surveyed and a surveyor's drawing and legal
description of the property is.
      (5)   The proposed division has been approved by the Clark County
Combined Health District when public sewer and/or water is not available.
 
   (b)   If approval is given under these provisions, the Planning Board,
acting through a properly designated representative, shall within seven (7)
working days after submission of required items and information, approve such
proposed division and, upon presentation of a conveyance for said parcel, shall
stamp "Approved by the City Planning Board of the City of Springfield, Ohio: No
Plat Required," or "Approved by the [insert specific commission name] Regional
Planning Commission: No Plat Required," as applicable, and the authorized
representative of the Planning Board shall sign the conveyance.  Each approval
shall be void after ninety (90) days.
 
   (c)   An application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per approval stamp, a
drawing, and a written legal description shall be required for submission of a
subdivision.  A drawing based on a survey showing location of property and
giving dimensions and other such information as may be necessary.
 
   (d)   When the existing street right-of-way width within the corporate limit
is inadequate as determined by the Thoroughfare Plan involved, and if the
right-of-way width within the corporate limit as proposed by the Thoroughfare
Plan is fixed and documented, a conveyance in the form of a separate deed shall
be required to satisfy said right-of-way width deficiency.  However, the strip
of land to satisfy said right-of-way width deficiency need not exceed fifty
(50) feet measured from the centerline of the right-of-way.  The grantor shall
not be required to install street improvements.  Such conveyance shall be made
to the City and the deed for which lot split approval is sought shall exclude
from its operation such land hereby required to be conveyed to the City.
 
1205.02  SUBDIVISIONS INVOLVING MORE THAN FIVE LOTS.
   (a)   Prior to preparing the first phase of the plan it is strongly
recommended that the subdivider seek the counsel of the staff at the outset by
submitting a sketch plan, the contents of which are described in Section
1205.02(b) below.  The staff shall, within five (5) working days, inform the
subdivider that the sketch plan as submitted does or does not meet the
objectives of these and other applicable regulations.  The reasons along with
the suggested modifications shall be given to the subdivider.
 
   (b)   The sketch plan may be in pencil showing the land in question in
relation to the surrounding area.  Existing and proposed streets, lots, and
other features shall be shown in a manner so that the sketch plan can be
properly evaluated.  Sufficient information pertaining to topographic data
shall be presented.
 
   (c)   Phase I of the plan will be submitted to the Planning Board's staff
containing all data required in this section and all other requirements of
these regulations at least 20 working days prior to the regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Board;provided the applicant agrees to an extension of
the thirty-day time limit imposed in Ohio Revised Code §711.09.  During the
above-prescribed time period, the subdivision technical review agencies shall
examine the plans as presented and will prepare and present to the Planning
Board's staff, a written report containing specific information concerning
their conclusions and recommendations on the plat as set forth in Section
1213.01(d).  When the applicant agrees to an extension of the thirty-day time
limit as per Section
1205.02(c), a letter advising of the contents of the returned reports shall be
mailed to the subdivider, to the subdivider’s developer and his engineer at
least eleven (11) working days prior to the Planning Board meeting date.  Any
changes recommended by the subdivision technical review agencies may be
incorporated into a revised Phase 1 Plan which is to be submitted to the staff
by the subdivider and to the subdivider’s developer.  If the applicant agrees
to said changes, he shall submit two (2) copies of the revised Phase I plans to
the staff at least five (5) working days prior to the Planning Board meeting
date.  The subdivision technical review agencies shall make recommendations to
the Planning Board.
      (1)   Effective September 1, 2000, an application, copies of which are
available in the office of the Planning Board's staff, shall be submitted
together with an application fee of $300.00 per subdivision plus $10.00 per
lot.
      (2)   A preliminary soil evaluation of a proposed development shall be
conducted by the Clark County Combined Health District in cooperation with the
subdivider and the subdivider’s developer and the engineer representing the
subdivider or the subdivider’s developer.  The purpose of the preliminary soil
evaluation is to identify the  soil  limitations, hazards, and other conditions
which  could  effect  the  installation and operation of on-site sewage
disposal systems in the proposed subdivision by examination of test holes. 
This procedure is not necessary if sanitary sewer lines are to be used.  The
Clark County Combined Health District shall approve such subdivision to use
individual water supplies or individual sewer disposal systems, or both, only
if it is satisfied, after giving due consideration to the topography and soil
conditions, the proposed size of lots, the number of lots proposed for the
subdivision, and other matters which may affect the operation of the individual
water supplies or individual sewage disposal systems, or both, and to the
regulations of the health district governing such systems, that individual
water supplies or individual sewage disposal systems will operate
satisfactorily in the subdivision and not be detrimental to the public health
or cause unsanitary conditions.  Any changes to street patterns, lot sizes or
utility easements subsequent to the approval of the Clark County Combined
Health District will require resubmission of the revised plans and re-approval
by the Clark County Combined Health District.
      (3)   Protective covenants, an example of which are available at the
office of the Planning Board's staff, may be filed.
      (4)   A vicinity sketch showing the outer boundaries of the proposed
subdivision, in relation to the existing streets, lots and drainage ways, and
developed land in the surrounding area, shall be incorporated on the plat map.
In addition, a vicinity sketch showing the outer boundaries of the proposed
subdivision, indicating proposed streets and lot lines in relation to the
surrounding area, existing streets, lots, and drainage ways shall be provided
on reproducible 8-1/2-inch by 11-inch paper in pencil or ink.
      (5)   A preliminary drainage plan shall be filed with the staff. This
plan shall consist of the amount of area (watershed) which drains into, in, and
through the proposed subdivision; the origin and proposed destination of storm
water; profiles of the drainage system (ditches, enclosed storm sewers and
streets) throughout the subdivision; location and calculations for sizing of
proposed drainage facilities which shall be designed for a ten-year storm
frequency; and field tile locations where known.
      (6)   The Phase I map of the proposed subdivision shall contain the
following items:
         (A)   Proposed title of the subdivision.  Said title shall not
duplicate the name of any other subdivision already in use.
         (B)   Location by section, town, range, city and state.
         (C)   Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner, and surveyor.
         (D)   A north point and a scale of not more than one hundred (100)
feet to the.
         (E)   Any portion of land being subdivided within a major drainage
area shall be shown as it pertains to the particular area.
         (F)   The location of existing rights-of-way; easements and physical
features such as drainage channels, wooded area, poles and power lines, fences,
roads, railroads and buildings within the tract.
         (G)   The location of existing rights-of-way and easements and the
approximate location of buildings on unplatted land parcels, wooded areas and
power lines for a distance of two hundred (200) feet from all sides of the land
in question.  Existing public streets shall be identified.
         (H)   The location and widths of proposed easements and rights-of-way.
         (I)   Names and addresses of owners of property abutting the proposed
subdivision. When the adjoining lots are too small for owner's names and
addresses to be drawn on the map itself, the lot shall be identified by
numbering or lettering and the owner's names and addresses may be shown on a
separate sheet to be attached to the Phase I map.
         (J)   Accurate delineation of all zoning districts in effect.  If any
zoning changes are contemplated by the subdivider, the proposed zoning shall be
outlined.
         (K)   Existing contours with intervals of not more than five (5) feet
where the slope is greater than ten (10) percent, and not more than two (2)
feet where the slope is less than ten (10) percent.  Elevations are to based on
sea level datum.
         (L)   The location of the bench mark used to determine the contour
lines.
         (M)   The location of existing lot lines adjacent to the land to be
subdivided, and the location with approximate dimensions of proposed lot lines.
         (N)   A system of lot numbering purely for identification and may be
changed at time of recording.
         (O)   The location and size of existing sanitary and storm sewers,
water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
adjacent thereto.
         (P)   The location of the setback lines on all proposed new lots.
         (Q)   The boundary of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line and
the approximate acreage.
         (R)   Date.
         (S)   The location of all proposed street light poles and power supply
lines to such poles; however, if the plan for such poles and power lines is not
yet complete at the time that Phase I approval is being requested, a note shall
be made on the Phase I Map and that the subdivider of the subdivider's
developer is working to complete such plan with the utility that will provide
power to the light poles and the Service Department.
            (Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
   (d)   In order for a Phase II plan to be considered by the Planning Board at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, it must be submitted to the Planning
Board's staff containing all data, required in this paragraph and all other
requirements of these regulations, at least 15 working days prior to the
regularly-scheduled meeting.
      (1)   An application shall be filed.
      (2)   A plan and profile of all streets, storm drainage lines, water
lines and sanitary sewer lines, and the final computations on sizing of water
lines and storm and sanitary sewers shall be submitted.  A typical street cross
section shall be indicated on these plans.  The plans shall also show the
location and type of all street lights to be installed as described in Section
1211.03(e). The plans and profile shall be prepared by or under the supervision
of a registered engineer.
      (3)   An estimate of the quantities and cost of all required
improvements.
      (4)   The final record map (Phase II of the plan) of the proposed
subdivision shall conform to the approved Phase I plan and be drawn to a scale
of 50-, 60-, 80-, or 100-feet per inch.  This map shall be presented in either
original India ink or photograph of an India ink drawing on tracing cloth or
plastic drafting film, provided the signatures are original. The overall final
plan shall be 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall contain all of the following
items which are applicable:
         (A)   The name of the proposed subdivision and the location by
section, town, range, city and state.
         (B)   Legal Description.
         (C)   A bar scale, a north point, and the acreage.
         (D)   An acknowledgment by the owner or owners of the adoption of the
plat, and dedication of streets and other public areas.
         (E)   A proper acknowledgement certificate of a Notary Public.
         (F)   Certification by a surveyor, registered in the State of Ohio,
that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his supervision on the
date the survey was made and that except as otherwise stated upon the map, all
monuments shown thereon actually exist.
         (G)   When necessary, a statement of approval by the Clark County
Combined Health District.
         (H)   A statement of approval by the Planning Board and a statement of
acceptance by the City Manager.  If the City is the payee of a certified check
or a letter of credit or is a party to a bond agreement, a statement of
acknowledgment shall be provided for the City Manager.
         (I)   A list of protective restrictions, if any.
         (J)   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate
dimensions and bearings.  Said exterior boundary, when computed from field
measurements of the ground, shall close within a limit of error of one (1) foot
to five thousand (5,000) feet before balancing survey.
         (K)   A known reference point plus corporation and/or section lines
transgressing the plat or immediately adjacent thereto shall be accurately tied
to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings.
         (L)   All dedicated areas for public use plus any area reserved for
future acquisition or dedication.  These areas shall be identified and
dimensioned.
         (M)   The acreage of the dedicated and/or reserved areas within the
plat for school, park, playground, or open space purposes.
         (N)   Length of all arcs, tangents, and radii along with internal
angles, points of curvature and tangent bearings and length of all curves.
         (O)   Easements for public use, services, utilities and drainage with
dimensions.
         (P)   All linear dimensions and angular measurements.
         (Q)   All lot lines with the necessary distances and bearings.  A
system of identifying each lot in accordance with the Clark County Auditor's
Office.
         (R)   Building setback lines with dimensions.
         (S)   The location of all proposed or existing monuments and bench
marks within the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
         (T)   The location and identification of all adjacent rights-of-way,
lots, alleys, and easements.
         (U)   The portion of land being subdivided within a major drainage
area shall be shown as it pertains to the particular area.
         (V)   Key map.
   (e)   The Secretary of the Planning Board shall notify the subdivider by
mail of the final action of the Planning Board within five (5) working days of
said action.  The subdivider shall record the plat in the office of the
Recorder of Clark County, Ohio, within one (1) calendar year after the date of
approval unless the Planning Board agrees to an extension.  If the plat is not
recorded within said time limit, the plan shall be considered void.  Within
twenty (20) days after the plat is recorded, the subdivider shall furnish
prints and either a sepia, a photolith, or the original reproducible linen of
the plat to the Planning Board's staff.
CHAPTER 1207
Utility Transition Areas
 
1207.01   Purpose.
1207.02   Provisions for Transition areas.
 
1207.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a way to develop land needed for
and adapted to residential use at a population density requiring both public
water supply and sanitary sewer system, but which area does not contain one or
both of these utilities at the time of development. It is necessary that
Utility Transition Areas be confined to undeveloped areas adjacent to existing
urban areas containing the needed utility services so that in due time these
services will be available.  The provisions are made allowing a resubdivision
of the original plat at a later date when utility lines are available so as to
induce development in an economical manner and orderly arrangement rather than
unsound scattered type of development.
 
1207.02  PROVISIONS FOR TRANSITION AREAS.
   (a)   Lots may be platted in such a manner that in the future each lot may
be split into two (2) or more parts, each of which contains the necessary area
and width requirements as set forth in Section
1203.03, Table 1, Column A as they pertain to single-family developments.  Such
lots shall be designated on the plat as having two or more parts by the use of
a thin broken line.  Each of the parts shall be identified by the letter A, B,
etc.  Each lot shall be sold as a unit and recorded on one deed.  Such lots
shall be restricted in use to one single-family residence. It shall also be
noted in the restrictions that, at the time water and sanitary sewer lines are
made available to any lot, said lot may be split in two (2) or more parts if
there is no existing dwelling so located on the lot that its required yards
occupy portions of two (2) or more subsections.  The above-noted restrictions
of sale and use of land shall be specified in the deed and plat.  A sample set
of subdivisions restrictions is listed in the reference manual located in the
Department of Community Development.
 
   (b)   At such time as public water and sanitary sewer facilities are
available to the aforementioned type of lots, the foregoing restrictions shall
be terminated if desired by the Planning Board, and City Commission when
involved, by authorizing the splitting of such lots under the provisions of
Section
1205.01.
 
 
Table 1
UTILITY TRANSITION AREA
            A            B           C             D             E
             Sewer and
             Water        Temporary
Type of      Available or Well and    Sewer and     Public Water  Public Sewer
Development  Provided by  Septic      Water Not     Available     Available
             Temporary    System      Available
             Package
             Plant
             60 feet      140 feet    125 feet      100 feet      80 feet
             continuous   continuous  continuous    continuous    continuous
             frontage on  frontage on frontage on a frontage on a frontage on a
Single       a public     a public    public road   public road   public road
Family       road         road
                                      28,000 sq.    20,000 sq.    16,000 sq.
             7,500 sq.    20,000 sq.  ft. of area   ft. of area   ft. of area
             ft. of area  ft. of area
             80 feet
             continuous
             frontage on
Two Family   a public
             road

             10,000 sq.
             ft. of area
Multi-Family To be established by Planning Board
Business     To be established by Planning Board
Industrial   To be established by Planning Board
 
1.   Greater lot width and areas may be required by the Clark County Combined
Health District in cases of adverse soil conditions.
2.   Calculations of lot areas shall not include that portion of any lot
occupied by a public right-of-way or proposed right-of-way either by dedication
or by easement.
 
 
 
CHAPTER1209
Commercial-IndustrialPlats
 
1209.01   Designstandardsand requirements.
1209.02   SpecialProvisions.
1209.01  DESIGNSTANDARDSANDREQUIREMENTS.
   All commercial-industrial plats shall adhere to design standards and
requirements specified in Chapter
1203 .
 
1209.02  SPECIALPROVISIONS.
   All commercial-industrial plats must adhere to the following requirements:
   (a)   Commercial-industrial plats must be zoned for business or industry
before this section is applicable.
   (b)   All commercial-industrial developments requiring new streets shall be
platted.  However, individual lot lines within the plat may be established by
resubdividing after the plat has been approved and recorded.  There will be no
limit on the number of subdivisions within the plat; provided zoning
regulations are not violated.
   (c)   Improvements shall be constructed according to the provisions of
Section
1211.01 except as specified below:
      (1)   All commercial-industrial plats must have approved sewer and water
facilities.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall not be required unless deemed necessary by the
Director.
 
 
 
CHAPTER1211
Improvements,Standards,andSpecifications
1211.01   Improvements.
1211.02   Standards.
1211.03   Specifications.
1211.04   Improvementassurance.
1211.01  IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   New Streets. All new streets shall be paved to a minimum width as
specified in Section
1211.02, Table 2, provided that in case of a street shown on the Thoroughfare
Plan, such requirement shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   The subdivider shall not be required to pave any such thoroughfare
to a width greater than twenty (20) feet from the centerline, or its equivalent
in the case of a divided pavement.
      (2)   The subdivider may enter into a contract with the City to pay into
the City Treasury an amount equal to the cost of pavement as specified in
Section
1211.01 (b)(1), which amount shall then be used by the City in construction of
the entire pavement.
      (3)   If the Planning Board has approved a street and lot arrangement in
which all lots back onto a major thoroughfare or the lots front on a parallel
service street, the subdivider shall not be required to provide street
improvements on the major thoroughfare unless considered necessary by the City
Engineer for adequate access to the plat.
      (4)   In Utility Transition Areas where lots are platted in pairs as
specified in Section
1203.03 (d), the required improvements with the exception of sanitary sewer and
water lines shall be as is required of lots which are comparable in size to
half of a Utility Transition lot unless sidewalks are waived by the Director.
 
   (b)   Existing Street.  When land is being subdivided within the City and
along an existing street, the subdivider and the subdivider’s developer are
responsible only for additional width of pavement which is reasonably
anticipated to be necessary as a result of his subdivision and its development
and use.  However, the maximum required width of pavement for which the
subdivider and the subdivider’s developer are responsible need not exceed
twenty (20) feet.
 
   (c)   Dead-End Streets.  Where streets are extended to the boundary of the
plat to provide accessibility to the future development in adjacent land, the
subdivider and the subdivider’s developer must provide a temporary "T"
turnaround.
 
   (d)   Half-Streets.  Where permitted, the initial improvement shall be such
that the pavement will be installed to a point two (2) feet beyond the crown. 
Curb, gutter, and sidewalks, when required, shall be required only on one side
of the right-of-way.
 
   (e)   Curb, Gutter, and Storm Drainage Within the City Limits.  Curb,
gutter, and storm drainage shall be required in all subdivisions within the
City limits except as noted in Table 2.  However, where curb and gutter
requirements are waived, all drainage ditches and swales shall be sodded with
blue grass and fescue.
 
   (f)   Sidewalks Within the City Limits.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the right-of-way in
all subdivisions located in single-family residential zoning districts where
lot frontage averages less than one hundred (100) feet.  In subdivisions to be
occupied, in whole or in part by multi-family dwellings, sidewalks shall be
required on both sides of the street, unless the Director determines that such
requirement is unnecessary.  Consideration shall be given to the lot size and
type of improvements in the surrounding area as well as the size of the
proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Where lot frontages for single-family houses average more than one
hundred (100) feet, a sidewalk shall be required on one side of minor
residential streets and on both sides of collector and major streets.  The
Director may waive the requirements of this paragraph if the lots average
15,000 square feet or more in area.  Consideration shall be given to the lot
size and type of improvements in the surrounding area as well as the size of
the proposed subdivision.
      (3)   Sidewalks are required to be constructed where they are essential
to pedestrian traffic circulation or as access to schools, playgrounds shopping
centers, transportation depots, or other facilities.  The lot size and
topography of the surrounding area may be taken into consideration as it
pertains to the sidewalk requirement.
      (4)   Sidewalks shall be four (4) feet wide except in areas including or
adjacent to schools, shopping centers or other high pedestrian traffic
generators.  In these areas, sidewalk width shall be determined by the
Director.
 
   (g)   Drainage.  The subdivider shall construct or install the necessary
ditches or closed sewers to drain the property in question completely and to
dispose of the storm water to the satisfaction of the Director.  When a public
storm sewer is accessible as determined by the Director, the developer shall
connect with the public system.  Storm drainage shall not be allowed to empty
into sanitary sewers.  In Utility Transition Areas where lots are platted as
specified in Chapter
1207, the required improvements with the exception of water and sanitary sewer
lines shall be as is required of lots which are comparable in size to half of a
Utility Transition lot unless sidewalks are waived.
 
   (h)   Water and Sanitary Sewers Located Within the City.  All divisions of
land within the corporate limits of Springfield shall be served by water and
sanitary sewer lines unless a subdivision is located in an area where the
topography is such that future sanitary sewer and/or water lines in the areas
would be improbable.  Where the Planning Board and City Commission, if
involved, determine that a subdivision is to be located in a Utility Transition
Area, the water and sanitary requirements shall be as set forth in Section
1211.01(j)(2).
 
   (i)   Water and Sanitary Requirements in a Potential Urban Area.
      (1)   Proposed or existing lots that utilize sewer and water shall not be
counted as being part of the Potential Urban Area.  Any such lot having at
least 250 feet of continuous frontage on a public road and one and one-half
acres or more of land area shall not be counted as part of a Potential Urban
Area regardless of the utilization of utilities.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is proposed in an Urban Area or an Utility
Transition Area the subdivider and the subdivider’s developer shall provide or
assure sanitary sewer and water facilities by one of the following methods:
         (A)   In Urban Areas:
            (i)   By installing the necessary lines and connecting them with
public sewer and water systems, or
            (ii)   By installing such lines along with a district community
water supply and sewer system. The water supply and sewage disposal systems
must meet the requirements of the County Sanitary Engineer, the Environmental
Protection Agency, and the Director.
         (B)   In Utility Transition Areas where sanitary sewer and water lines
are not available, the developer of a proposed subdivision shall provide or
assure said utility facilities by one of the following methods:
            (i)   By installing necessary lines and creating a temporary water
supply and sewage treatment facilities, which must meet the requirements of the
Community Development Department, the Clark County Combined Health District,
and the Environmental Protection Agency.
            (ii)   By requiring the home builders to install temporary wells
and septic tanks.
            (iii)   By platting and selling lots in the manner set forth in
Chapter
1207, and complying with the other requirements of the Utility Transition Area
or by platting lots of the size or manner as indicated in Section
1203.03, Table 1, Column C.
         (C)   Soil evaluations are required for all new subdivisions (platted
or unplatted) not served by a public or community sewer.  Said evaluations
shall be conducted by the Clark County Combined Health District in cooperation
with the subdivider and by either a sanitarian, registered surveyor, or civil
or sanitary engineer representing the subdivider, and shall be done in
accordance with the requirements and specifications of the Clark County
Combined Health District.  Approval by the Clark County Combined Health
District is required before the Phase I subdivision is approved by the Planning
Board; however, a conditional approval, subject to approval by the Clark County
Combined Health District, may be granted on the Phase I Plan if Clark County
Combined Health District approval has not been received by meeting time. 
Before further subdividing of lands within a potential Urban Area is permitted,
the subdivider or the subdivider’s developer shall submit a scale drawing
showing his intentions concerning the remainder of lands under his control. 
The staff shall review the drawing and submit it to the Planning Board to
determine if the land in question
 
   (j)   RESERVED
 
   (k)   Waiver of Requirement.  The Planning Board may waive sewer or water
requirements, or both, if they find:
      (1)   That the topography is such that the extension of water and
sanitary sewer lines in the area is economically not feasible or the cost of
providing community facilities is such as to prohibit the subdivision of the
area; or
      (2)   That the plat is not in the path of urban growth, and is distantly
located from any developed areas; or
      (3)   That the plat is located in the near proximity to utility
facilities and that said facilities are not available because of government
action.
 
   (l)   Fence.  When a development is planned adjacent to a large drainage
ditch or waterway, a fence shall be required along the drainage right-of-way. 
The City Commission may waive said fence requirements if it finds that no
substantial hazard would result therefrom.
 
   (m)   Permanent Monuments.  Permanent monuments shall be located as required
by the Director and/or the Planning Board.  The number of monuments required
shall not be less than specified in the Ohio Revised Code Section 711.03, which
states that ten lots or less requires four (4) monuments.  Over ten lots
requires a number deemed necessary to properly control the survey and that the
line of sight between such markers can be observed from one marker to the
other.
 
   (n)   Street Lights.  The subdivider and the subdivider’s developer of each
new subdivision shall construct street lights within the subdivision and shall
have the street lights connected to a public utility power supply.  The
construction of the street lights and connection to the power supply shall be
entirely at the expense of the subdivider and the subdivider’s developer.  The
subdivider and the subdivider’s developer shall make all necessary arrangements
to insure that a public utility power supply will be provided to illuminate the
street lights in a manner so as to insure that the cost to the City for
illuminating such lights shall not exceed the prevailing cost in the City for
illumination of street lights.  Said arrangements to include, if necessary, the
subdivider and the subdivider’s developer conveying ownership of the street
lights, poles, power supply conduits, and other appurtenances directly to the
City or to the  public utility furnishing power to the street lights, as
directed by the City, in a manner acceptable to the City or the public utility
which will be providing power to illuminate the street lights.
 
   (o)   Fiber Optic Conduit.  For each new subdivision the subdivider or the
subdivider’s developer shall install fiber optic conduit within the public
right-of-way along the entire frontage of each exposure where the subdivision
adjoins a public street.  Such construction shall meet all specifications of
the City Engineer, shall be designed to allow adjacent properties to access the
fiber optic conduit and shall be designed and constructed at the subdivider’s
expense or at the expense of the subdivider’s developer.
 
1211.02  STANDARDS.
   (a)   Streets.
      (1)   All streets in a subdivision shall be classified and governed in
accordance with Section
1211.02, Table 2 located in this section, except for primary and secondary
thoroughfares in which case reference should be made to the appropriate
Thoroughfare Plan available in the offices of the Planning Board's staff or
Clark County Planning Commission.
      (2)   All street pavements shall intersect each other as near to right
angles as possible.  At right angle intersections, the curb radius shall be 25
feet at intersections involving two 50-foot rights-of-way.  At all other street
intersections, the curb radius shall be as specified by the City Engineer.  At
intersections where the angle is other than 90 degrees, the City Engineer shall
determine acceptable curb radius.
      (3)   When a cul-de-sac is permitted with a length greater than or equal
to 300 feet, the acceptable minimum road surface radius within the turnaround
shall be forty-five (45) feet. For a cul-de-sac with a length less than 300
feet, the acceptable minimum road surface within the turnaround shall be forty
(40) feet.  The surface configuration for a temporary or "T" turnaround may be
as illustrated in the reference manual located in the Department of Community
Development.
      (4)   The minimum tangent between curves of a reverse curve in a
collector street shall be 100 feet.  The minimum tangent between curves of a
reverse curve in a minor street shall be 50 feet except no tangent shall be
required on minor streets if either of the curves has a degree of curvature of
one degree or less (radius equal to or greater than 5,792.58).
         (Ord. 05-309.  Passed 12-6-05.)
 
   (b)   Drainage.  Where curb and gutters are involved, catch basins shall be
constructed on the upstream side of the crosswalks, at all low points in the
street at points where drainage ditches enter the area being developed, and on
streets at distances of approximately 400 feet.  However, if due to topographic
features, the contributing storm flow is relatively small, the spacing of catch
basins may be increased.
 
1211.03  SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Street Grade Approval.  No street grading shall be permitted until the
Phase I Plan has been approved by the Planning Board and the City Engineer has
approved the final construction drawings.  The entire width of the right-of-way
shall be brought to the approved grade and sloped at an angle agreeable to the
Director, back from the property line to meet existing or planned elevation.
 
   (b)   Specifications.  The design and construction of curb and gutter,
streets, walks, drainage facilities, sanitary facilities, and water lines shall
be in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications of the City.
 
   (c)   Fence.  When required as specified in Section
1211.01 (l), fences shall be of the chain-link type or other acceptable all
metal material design and three-and-one-half (3-1/2) feet or more in height.
 
   (d)   Permanent Monuments.  Permanent monuments shall be made of stone or
concrete, thirty-six (36) inches in length and six (6) inches in diameter, or
six (6) inches square with a reinforcing bar or pipe cast in the center.
 
   (e)   Street Lights.
      (1)   All street lights constructed in new subdivisions shall be
constructed in conformity to specifications and ordinances of the City and the
specifications of the public utility which shall be providing power to such
street lights.  After street lights have been constructed in a new subdivision,
the developer shall provide written verification to the City from the public
utility providing power to the street lights certifying that the subdivider and
the subdivider’s developer has satisfactorily complied with the specifications
of the public utility and the public utility will provide power to illuminate
the street lights.
      (2)   All street lighting shall be high pressure sodium of a type and
style mutually approved by the City and the public utility company which shall
provide power to illuminate the street lights.
      (3)   Roadways shall be lighted to the following minimum levels, based on
the classification of the roadway.
 
 
Minor               0.35 maintained foot-candles
Collector           0.60 maintained foot-candles
Major and Secondary 1.00 maintained foot-candles
 
      (4)   The underground power cable and all switching controls for the
lighting system shall be designed and installed per standards established by
the public utility furnishing electrical power and in conformance with
municipal ordinances.
      (5)   All lighting units shall be a type mutually approved by the City
and the public utility which shall provide power to illuminate the lighting
units, and painted black.  This luminaire shall meet all requirements as
specified by the public utility which shall provide power to illuminate the
luminaire.
      (6)   All supports shall be of a type mutually approved by the City and
the utility which shall provide power to illuminate the lighting units and
painted black.  All supports shall meet the requirements as specified by the
pubic utility which shall provide power to illuminate the completed lighting
system.
      (7)   Lighting units shall be mounted at a sufficient height to prevent
veiling glare.  Proper heights shall be determined through the public utility
which shall provide power to illuminate the completed lighting system and the
manufacturer of the luminaire.
      (8)   The lighting plan submitted for approval shall include a scaled
drawing of the development showing the location of all proposed lighting units
and associated wiring.  Additionally, calculations shall be furnished to show
the lighting level(s) furnished by the proposed layout.
      (9)   The lighting plan shall be approved by the public utility providing
power to illuminate the completed lighting system and the City before
installation may be commenced.
 
1211.04  IMPROVEMENTASSURANCE.
   (a)   Condition.  In proposed subdivisions, new lots shall not be sold or
permanent buildings erected until the plat in question has been recorded. 
Before certification of final approval, the subdivider must guarantee the
installation of improvements as specified in these rules by adhering to one of
the methods listed below:
      (1)   The required improvements may be installed prior to final approval
of the plat, but only after submission and approval of construction drawings as
set forth in Section
1211.03 and after inspection fees have been paid.  The procedure of inspection
shall be as set forth in Section
1211.04(c)(3).
      (2)   In lieu of Section
1211.04(a)(1), a performance bond of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated
cost of improvements shall be deposited with the City.
      (3)   In lieu of Section
1211.04(a)(1) and (2), a certified check for one hundred (100) percent of the
estimated cost of improvements shall be deposited with the City. Inspection
shall be made by the City.  The check shall be accompanied by a contract
between the subdivider and the payee which, contract shall state the terms and
conditions under which the check may be cashed if the subdivider fails to
complete the required improvements within the time limits as specified in
Section
1211.04(c)(2).
      (4)   Any other type of assurance that has been reviewed by and is
acceptable to the City Commission.
 
   (b)   Reduction and Release of Security for Installation of Improvements. 
Upon completion of not less than 25 percent of the required work, the
subdivider may submit to the Director an estimate of the work done and request
reduction in the amount of security provided pursuant to Section
1211.04(a).  After approval of the work and estimate, the Director may
recommend reduction to the City Commission.  Successive requests for reduction
may be made upon completion of 25 percent of the required work remaining at the
time of the last previous request for such reduction.  Upon completion of all
of the required work the subdivider may submit a final estimate and request
release.  After approval of the work and estimate, the Director shall recommend
release to the City Commission.
 
   (c)   General Consideration.
      (1)   Provisions shall be made in the case of bond whereby the
subdivider, his heirs, successors, or agents shall complete and comply with all
applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of these
regulations.
      (2)   The time limit for completion of improvements shall be two years
from the date the contract for improvements is executed by the City.  However
the subdivider may within such two-year period, submit to the City Commission a
request in writing, for an extension of not more than one year, stating therein
the reasons to justify the requested extension.  At the termination of the
aforementioned period or extension thereof the City may use as much of the
security as is necessary to complete the improvements if it is determined that
an extension of time is not feasible.
      (3)   Inspection of each phase of work shall be made by the Director or
his representative.  The subdivider shall inform the inspecting engineer's
office that work is ready for inspection 24 hours in advance of the time he
expects it to be obscured by further work.  Previous to installing any required
improvement, an inspection fee amounting to two and one-half percent (2-1/2%)
of the estimated cost as submitted by the developer and approved by the City
Engineer of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines, street lights, streets,
curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be deposited with the City Treasurer at the
time of the approval of the security. In addition to the said inspection fee,
the subdivider shall pay to the City an additional inspection fee for after
hours inspection as follows:
 
 
Saturday inspections                            $65.00/hour
Inspections nor previously scheduled            $65.00/hour
Sunday and holiday inspections                  $90.00/hour
Inspections performed between 5 p.m. and 8 a.m. $65.00/hour
 
All Saturday, Sunday, and holiday inspections fees will be billed at three
hours of services or the actual time the inspector is required to perform
services, whichever is greater.
         (Ord. 05-253.  Passed 10-4-05.)
      (4)   If a proposed subdivision is to be annexed to the City, the bond or
certified check or other security shall be held by the City and the inspection
shall be made by the City.  A petition to annex a proposed subdivision must be
submitted to the Board of County Commissioners of Clark County, Ohio prior to
Phase I approval before the subdivision will be considered to be under the
complete jurisdiction of the City Subdivision Regulations.  If any City sewer
and/or water lines are extended, the bond or certified check or other security
shall be held and the inspection made by the City as it pertains to said
utility lines.
 
 
 
CHAPTER1213
Plan Approval Procedure
 
1213.01   Phase I plan and data.
1213.02   Additional prints.
1213.03   Time limit.
1213.04   Refusal of approval.
1213.05   Phase 2 (record plan) and data.
1213.051   Requirements prior to signing of the plat.
1213.06   Requirement after recording.
1213.07   Required statements and signatures to be affixed on on the Phase 2
(record) map.
1213.01  PHASE I PLAN AND DATA.
   A Phase I plan shall be acted upon by the Planning Board provided the
applicant has paid to the City an Engineering Review fee of Seven Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($750.00) and the following applicable items have been submitted to the
board 20 working days prior to the meeting.  Plats located within the three-
mile area should be submitted 20 working days prior to the County Planning
Commission meeting.  Plans shall be submitted in the form and with the number
of copies prescribed by the Director of Community Development.
   (a)   The subdivider should deliver all required Phase I submittals in good
order to the Planning Board's staff no later than 20 working days preceding the
regularly scheduled meeting of the board. Test hole results of the preliminary
soil evaluation as required by Section
1205.02(d) shall be submitted to the Clark County Combined Health District,
when necessary, whichever is applicable, and the Planning Board's staff at the
time of or prior to submission of the Phase I plan.
   (b)   Plat Copies.  Within one working day after receiving the Phase I plat
and accompanying items, the staff will refer one copy of the plan to the
Service Department for review of improvement plan; local school district, where
involved, for report on school site requirements; and other applicable agencies
and departments.
   (c)   Preparation of Specific Information.  Within seven working days after
receiving the plat, each official listed in Section
1213.01(b) above, is requested to prepare and present to the Planning Board's
staff a written report containing specific information concerning his
conclusions and recommendations on the plat.  The plat may be considered
acceptable by the officials involved if their replies are not received by the
Planning Board's staff in the prescribed time.
   (d)   Mailing of Report.  The staff will prepare the report on the plat,
which will be mailed to the members of the Planning Board on the Friday
preceding the scheduled hearing.
      (Ord. 05-233.  Passed 9-6-05.)
 
1213.02  ADDITIONAL PRINTS.
   (a)   After the Phase I map is approved, the owner or developer shall submit
such prints of the corrected Phase I plan as the Director shall require.
 
   (b)   As an option at the time of submitting the Phase I prints hereby
required, the subdivider or the subdivider’s developer may also submit the
corrected Phase I plan and profile with final computations on sizing of
waterlines and storm and sanitary sewers as required by Section
1205.02(d)(2).  Within 30 days after the submission of the corrected Phase I
plan, profile, and final computations, the subdivider and the subdivider’s
developer will be informed of any additional changes which will be recommended
or required by the review agencies, if any, for the Phase 2 plat approval.  If
the subdivider is not so informed within such period, there shall be a period
of one year's time thereafter in which the applicant can be assured that no
more changes or demands can be made against his plan without his consent unless
changes to applicable subdivision regulations or other ordinances passed by
City Commission occur during that time.
 
1213.03  TIME LIMIT.
   A Phase I map shall be submitted for examination or reapproval if the time
limit between the approval of the Phase I map and the Phase 2 map for the
entire tract exceeds five years.
 
1213.04  REFUSAL OF APPROVAL.
   The grounds of refusal of approval of any plat submitted, including citation
or reference to the rule or regulation violated by the plat, shall be stated
upon the record of the Planning Board and such information shall be provided to
the applicant.
 
1213.05  PHASE 2 (RECORD PLAN) AND DATA.
   A Phase 2 plan shall be acted upon by the Planning Board provided the
applicant has paid to the City an Engineering Review fee of Seven Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($750.00) and the following applicable items have been submitted
fifteen working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting.  Plans shall be
submitted in the form and with the number of copies presented by the Director
of Community Development.  If the plat is not acted upon within 30 days from
the date of submission, the provisions of Section 711.09 through 711.10 of the
Ohio Revised code shall apply unless the developer agrees to an extension of
said 30-day time limit.  The grounds for refusal of approval of any plat
submitted, including citation of or reference to the rule or regulation
violated by the plant, shall be stated upon the record of the Planning Board
and such information shall be provided to the applicant.
(Ord. 05-233.  Passed 9-6-05.
1213.051 REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO SIGNING OF THE PLAT.
   The secretary of the Planning Board shall not sign the "Approval of Planning
Commission" referenced by Section 1213.07(f) of these regulations until:
   (a)   All applicable inspection fees have been paid to the City;
   (b)   A plat agreement, specifying public improvements, the improvement
assurance and such other matters as the Law Director deems necessary to protect
the City, has been approved by the City Commission and has been entered into
between the City and the subdivider;
   (c)   The improvement assurance specified in the said plat agreement has
been fully funded and made contractually binding on the subdivider; and
   (d)   All permits to install water and sewer facilities for the subdivision
required by the State of Ohio, Environmental Protection Agency have been issued
to the subdivider.
 
1213.06  REQUIREMENTS AFTER RECORDING.
   Within twenty days after the plat is recorded, the developer shall furnish
such copies of the recorded final plat and covenants as the Director shall
require.
 
1213.07  REQUIRED STATEMENTS AND SIGNATURES TO BE AFFIXED ON THE PHASE 2
(RECORD) MAP.
   It is required that the Phase 2 plat contain the applicable forms and
wording as listed below.  These statements and signatures (as well as covenants
and restrictions) may be required to be affixed on separate sheets.
   (a)   Description.
Situated in the State of Ohio, County of Clark, City of Springfield, (Township
shall be designated here for three-mile area plats) and being a part of Section
_____, Town _____, Range _____, M.R.S. and being further described as follows: 
Being a subdivision of _____ acres and being all the land contained within the
boundaries shown as A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J, and being part of the
land conveyed to _____ by deed from _____, dated _____ and recorded in Volume
_____, page _____, deed records of Clark County, Ohio.  Also being all the land
conveyed to _____, by deed from _____, dated _____ and recorded in deed records
of Clark County, Ohio, Volume _____, and page _____.
   (b)   Owners' Dedication.
We, the undersigned, being all the owners and lienholders of the land platted
herein, do hereby voluntarily consent to the execution of said plat and
dedicate the streets as shown hereon, comprising a total of _____ acres, to the
public use forever.
Easements shall be of such size and width as shown on the plat map and are for
the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, or removal of
water, gas, sewer, electric, telephone, or other utility lines or service, and
for the express privilege of removing any and all trees or other obstructions
to the free use of said utilities and for providing ingress and egress to the
property for said purposes and are to be maintained as such forever.
   (c)   The following language shall be used when lots back onto major
vehicular traffic arteries:
Vehicular right-of-access shall not be allowed across the right-of-way line of
_____ Street, along the rear of lots _____, _____, _____, and _____, and such
right-of-vehicular access is hereby relinquished and released to the City of
Springfield, Ohio, (or other political subdivision having control of said
street).
   (d)   The following language shall be used only if the restrictions are
listed on a second sheet:
This plat is subject to the covenants and restrictions shown on the separate
document attached hereto and labeled "Sheet 2 of 2 pages".
   (e)   Acknowledgment.
State of Ohio
      SS:
County of Clark
Be it remembered that on this ____ day of _____, _____, personally came the
said John and Jane Doe, to be known and acknowledge the signing and execution
of the foregoing statement to be their voluntary act and deed.
_________________________
Notary Public, State of Ohio
   (f)   Approval of Planning Commission.
I hereby certify that this plat was approved by the [City Planning Board of
Springfield, Ohio, or CEDA Planning Commission, as applicable] on _____.  This
approval becomes void unless this plat is filed for recording within one
calendar year of this approval.
Certified ________________________________
________________________________________
Secretary, [City Planning Board of Springfield, Ohio, or CEDA Planning
Commission, as applicable]
   (g)   Certification by Health Official, When Applicable
I hereby certify that this plat meets the requirements of the Clark County
Combined Health District.
________________________________________
Health Commissioner, Clark County Combined Health District
   (h)   County Auditor.
I hereby certify that the land described by this plat was transferred on _____.
________________________________________
Clark County Auditor
   (i)   County Recorder.
I hereby certify that this plat was filed for recording on _____, and that it
was recorded on _____, in Volume ____, Page _____, plat records of Clark
County, Ohio.
Fee $________________
________________________________________
Clark County Recorder
   (j)   Certification of Surveyor.
I hereby certify that this plat represents a true and complete survey made by
me or under my supervision in _____, and that except as otherwise stated upon
the map, all monuments shown thereon actually exist.
________________________________________
Registered Surveyor No. _____
   (k)   Certification by the City Engineer.
I hereby certify that a copy of this plat was filed in the Service Department
and that it has been approved by the City Engineer in accordance with the Ohio
Rev. Code 711.08.
Date                                                   
By:                                                     
        City Engineer
(Ord. 20-100.  Passed 4-7-2020.)
   (l)   Statement of Acceptance.
Dedication of the land shown on this plat for roads, streets, or other public
purposes is hereby accepted as of _____, by The City of Springfield, Ohio.
Date  ___________________________________
By:  ____________________________________
   City Manager
   (m)   Acknowledgment of City Manager.
(Applicable only if City is the payee of a certified check or a party to a bond
agreement.)
I hereby acknowledge that adequate improvement assurances have been made.
Date  ___________________________________
By:  ____________________________________
   City Manager
(Ord. 19-289.  Passed 12-10-19.)
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART THIRTEEN--BUILDING CODE
 
TITLE ONE - Technical Standards Adopted
Chap.
1301.   Ohio Codes.
Chap.
1305.   International Property Maintenance Code.
 
TITLE THREE - Local Provisions
Chap.
1311.   Permits.
Chap.
1313.   Permit Fees.
Chap.
1315.   Appeals.
Chap.
1317.    Gas Piping Code.
Chap.
1321.   Historic Landmarks Commission.
Chap.
1322.   Inspection of Non-Owner-Occupied Dwelling Units.
Chap.
1323.   Abatement of Nuisances and Demolition of Structures.
Chap.
1324.   Code Compliance and Hearings.
Chap.
1325.   Moving of Buildings.
Chap.
1327.   Building Contractors.
Chap.
1329.   Flood Plain Regulations.
 
TITLE FIVE - Plumbing Regulations
Chap.
1361.   Administration; Ohio Plumbing Code Adoption.
Chap.
1363.   Definitions.
Chap.
1367.   Licensing Plumbers.
Chap.
1369.   Plumbing Permits and Fees.
 
TITLE SEVEN - Vacant Property Registration Program
Chap.
1380.   Administration of Vacant Property Registration Program.
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART THIRTEEN--BUILDING CODE
TITLE ONE--Technical Standards Adopted
Chap.
1301.   Building Codes.
Chap.
1305.   International Property Maintenance Code.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1301
Building Codes
 
1301.01   Ohio Building Code adoption.
1301.02   National Electrical Code adoption.
1301.03   Ohio Mechanical Code adoption.
1301.04   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two-, and Three-Family Dwellings
adoption.
1301.05   International Fuel Gas Code adoption.
1301.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption of technical codes - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
Ohio Plumbing Code application - see BLDG.
1361.02
 
1301.01  OHIO BUILDING CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)    Adoption.  The Ohio Building Code, 2017 Edition (cited as “OBC”) as
adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Division of Industrial
Compliance, Ohio Department of Commerce, effective January 1, 2007, and as
published in Chapters 4101:1-1 through 4101:1-35 of the Ohio Administrative
Code (cited as “OAC”) is hereby adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 13-226,  Passed 9-1-13; Ord. 18-50, Passed 2-27-18.)
 
1301.02  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)   Adoption.  The National Electric Code, 2017 Edition (cited as “NFPA-
70-2014”), as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby
adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio, as amended by the deletions and
modifications described in this Section
1301.02, and is incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten in this Section
1301.02.
 
   (b)   Amendments.
      (1)   NFPA-70-2017 Section 90.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Enforcement. The City of Springfield, Ohio, is the authority having
jurisdiction for purposes of enforcing this Code and shall be administered by
the City Manager through the Chief Building Official appointed by the City
Manager. This Code may require new products, constructions, or materials that
may not yet be available at the time the Code is adopted. In such event, the
authority having jurisdiction may permit the use of the products,
constructions, or materials that comply with the most recent previous edition
of this Code adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio.
      (2)   NFPA-70-2017 Section 90.10 is adopted to read as follows: 
         Appeals.  Appeals involving enforcement of matters relating to this
Code shall be governed by Chapter
1315 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 13-226, Passed 9-1-13; Ord. 16-45, Passed 2-16-16; Ord. 18-50, Passed 2-
27-18)
   
1301.03  OHIO MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTION.
   Adoption.  The Ohio Mechanical Code, 2017 Edition (cited as “OMC”), as
adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Division of Industrial
Compliance, Ohio Department of Commerce and as published in Chapters 4101:2-
1 through 4101:2-15 of the Ohio Administrative Code (cited as “OAC”) is hereby
adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 13-226, Passed 9-1-13; Ord. 18-50, Passed 2-27-18.)
1301.04  OHIO RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
ADOPTION.
   Adoption.  The Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two-, and Three-Family
Dwellings, 2019 Edition (cited as “RCO”) as adopted by and as said RCO may be
hereafter amended by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Division of
Industrial Compliance, Ohio Department of Commerce, and as published in Chapter
4101:8-1 through 4101:8-44 of the Ohio Administrative Code (cited as OAC) is
hereby adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio, and is incorporated by
reference as if fully rewritten in this Section
1301.04.
(Ord. 19-237. Passed 9-10-19.)
1301.05  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)   Adoption.  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition (cited as
“FGC”), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by
The City of Springfield, Ohio, as amended by the deletions and modifications
described in this Section
1301.05, and is incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten in this Section
1301.05.
 
   (b)   Amendments.
      (1)   FGC Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
         Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code for The
City of Springfield, Ohio and shall be cited as such and will be referred to in
this Section as “this code”.
      (2)   FGC Section 101.2 is amended by deleting Exceptions (1) and (2).
      (3)   FGC Section 104.3 is amended to read as follows: 
         Inspections.  The code official and assistants to the code official
shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of
inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections
shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
      (4)   FGC Section 104.4 is amended to read as follows: 
         Right of entry.  The code official and assistants to the code official
are authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and
seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized
to pursue recourse as provided by law.
      (5)   FGC Section 104.5 is amended to read as follows: 
         Identification.  The code official and assistants to the code official
shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.
      (6)   FGC Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
         Imposition of permit fees.  The imposition of permit fees shall be
governed by Chapter
1313 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (7)   FGC Section 106.5.3 is deleted.
      (8)   FGC Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows: 
         Appeals.  Appeals involving enforcement of matters relating to this
code shall be governed by Chapter
1315 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (9)   FGC Sections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted.
      (10)   All references to the International Building Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Building Code as adopted in
Section
1301.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (11)   All references to the ICC Electrical Code in this code are deleted
and replaced with a reference to the National Electrical Code as adopted in
Section
1301.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (12)   All references to the International Mechanical Code in this code
are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Mechanical Code as
adopted in Section
1301.03 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (13)   All references to the International Residential Code in this code
are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Residential Code for One- Two-
and Three Family Dwellings as adopted in Section
1301.04 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (14)   All references to the International Property Maintenance Code in
this code are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Property Maintenance
Code as adopted in Section
1305.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (15)   All references to the International Plumbing Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Plumbing Code as adopted in
Section
1361.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (16)   All references to the International Fire Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Fire Prevention Code as adopted in
Part 15 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (17)   All references to the International Energy Conservation Code in
this code are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Building Code
as adopted in Section
1301.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
         (Ord. 13-226.  Passed 9-1-13.)
1301.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, including the codes adopted
herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000), or imprisoned not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both.  Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.  As provided by Ohio R.C. 2901.23 and 2929.31,
organizations convicted of an offense shall be fined not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 05-47.  Passed 2-15-05.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1303
Pole and Portable Storage Buildings
REPEALED BY ORD. 06-191, PASSED 5-16-06.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1305
International Property Maintenance Code
 
1305.01   International Property Maintenance Code adoption.
1305.02   Civil penalty for failure to pay.
1305.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption of technical codes--see Ohio R.C. 731.231
 
1305.01  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)   Adoption.  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition
(cited as “IPMC”) as prepared by the International Code Council, Inc. is hereby
adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio, as amended by the deletions and
modifications described in this Section
1305.01, and is incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten in this Section
1305.01.
 
   (b)   Amendments.
      (1)   IPMC Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
         Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code for The City of Springfield, Ohio and shall be cited as such and will be
referred to in this  Chapter as “this code”.
      (2)   IPMC Section 101.3 is amended to read as follows: 
         Intent.  This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises.
      (3)   IPMC Section 102.3 is deleted.
      (4)   IPMC Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: 
         Enforcement agency. The Code Enforcement Division shall enforce the
requirements of this Section
1305.01 and the Code Enforcement Manager in charge thereof shall be known as
the code official for purposes of applying  this code.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Chief Building Official, the Fire Marshal and the Health
Commissioner of the Clark County Combined Health District are each authorized
to perform inspections and to issue notices and orders as deputies of the Code
Enforcement Manager.
      (5)   IPMC Sections 103.2 and 103.3 are deleted.
      (6)   IPMC Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows: 
         Imposition of permit fees.  The imposition of permit fees shall be
governed by Chapter
1313 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (7)   IPMC Section 104.3 is amended to read as follows: 
         Inspections.  The code official and assistants to the code official
shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of
inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections
shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
      (8)   IPMC Section 104.4 is amended to read as follows: 
         Right of entry.  The code official and assistants to the code official
are authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and
seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized
to pursue recourse as provided by law.
      (9)   IPMC Section 104.5 is amended to read as follows: 
         Identification.  The code official and assistants to the code official
shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.
      (10)   IPMC Sections 106.3 and 106.4 are deleted.
      (11)   IPMC Section 107.2, subparagraph (6) is deleted.
      (12)   IPMC Sections 107.4 is deleted.
      (13)   IPMC Section 111.1 is amended to read as follows: 
         Appeals.  Appeals involving enforcement of matters relating to this
code shall be governed by Chapter
1315 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (14)   IPMC Sections 111.2 through 111.7 are deleted.
      (15)   IPMC Section 201.3 is deleted.
      (16)   IPMC Section 302.4 is amended to read as follows: 
         Weeds.  All premises and exterior property regulated under this code
shall be maintained free from vegetation which is in violation of Chapter
909 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (17)   IPMC Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows: 
         Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as
air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
      (18)   IPMC Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows: 
         Heat supply.  Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom.
on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
toilet rooms.
         Exceptions:
         1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its fall
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the Ohio Plumbing Code as adopted in Section
1361.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
         2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
I°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
      (19)   IPMC Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows: 
         Occupiable work spaces.  Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied.
         Exceptions:
1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
      (20)   IPMC Section 604.2 is amended to read as follows: 
         Service.  The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve
as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with the National Electrical Codeas adopted in Section
1301.02 of the Codified Ordinances. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-
wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less
than 100 amperes.
      (21)   IPMC Section 604.3 is amended to read as follows: 
         Electrical system hazards.  Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard. Such electrical systems shall be upgraded to
at least a three- wire, 220/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a
rating of not less than 100 amperes.
      (22)   All references to the International Building Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Building Code as adopted in
Section
1301.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (23)   All references to the ICC Electrical Code in this code are deleted
and replaced with a reference to the National Electrical Code as adopted in
Section
1301.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (24)   All references to the International Mechanical Code in this code
are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Mechanical Code as
adopted in Section
1301.03 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (25)   All references to the International Plumbing Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Plumbing Code as adopted in
Section
1361.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (26)   All references to the International Fire Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Fire Prevention Code as adopted in
Part 15 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (27)   All references to the International Zoning Code in this code are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Zoning Code as adopted in
Part 11 of the Codified Ordinances.
         (Ord. 05-47.  Passed 2-15-05.)
1305.02  CIVIL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   In the event any person fails to pay a sum, required to be paid to the City
under this Chapter (hereinafter the “principal sum”), within ninety (90) days
after the sum becomes due and owing to the City, a civil penalty is imposed on
such person equal to thirty-three and thirty-three one-hundredths percent
(33.33 %) of the sum of the following two items:
   (a)   The unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter,
   (b)   Court costs incurred in obtaining a judgment against such person for
the unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter.
      (Ord. 07-22.  Passed 1-30-07.)
 
1305.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, including the code adopted
herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000), or imprisoned not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both.  Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.  As provided by Ohio R.C. 2901.23 and 2929.31,
organizations convicted of an offense shall be fined not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 05-47.  Passed 2-15-05.)
 
 
 
TITLE THREE - Local Provisions
Chap.
1311.    Permits.
Chap.
1313.    Permit Fees.
Chap.
1315.   Appeals.
Chap.
1321.   Historic Landmarks Commission.
Chap.
1322.     Inspection of Non-Owner-Occupied Dwelling Units.
Chap.
1323.   Abatement of Nuisances and Demolition of Structures.
Chap.
1324.   Code Compliance and Hearings.
Chap.
1325.   Moving of Buildings.
Chap.
1327.   Building Contractors.
Chap.
1329.   Flood Plain Regulations.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1311
Permits
 
1311.01   Permit required.
1311.02   Completion of work already authorized.
1311.03   Application form.
1311.04   Persons eligible to make application.
1311.05   Amendments to application.
1311.06   Plans to accompany application.
1311.07   Plot plan.
1311.08   Action on application.
1311.09   Revocation of permit.
1311.10   Approval of permit in part.
1311.11   Compliance with permit.
1311.12   Reducing or diminishing lot area.
1311.13   Signature to permit.
1311.14   Plan approval and permit expiration; extension; work delay.
1311.15   Posting of permit.
1311.16   Commencement notice to be given.
1311.17   Demolition requirements.
1311.18   Stop work order.
1311.19   Certificate of use and occupancy.
1311.20   Repealed by Ord. 10-97.
1311.21   Endorsements on certificates of use and occupancy.
1311.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Permit fees - see BLDG. Ch.
1313
 
1311.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall construct, alter, re-roof, remove or demolish, or
commence  the construction,  alteration,  removal  or  demolition  of  a 
building or structure or install equipment for the operation of a building or
structure, construct a swimming pool or do electrical or heating, ventilating
or air conditioning work without first filing with the Chief Building Official
an application in writing and obtaining a formal permit.
(Ord. 96-386.  Passed 11-26-96.)
 
   (b)   No person shall remove or demolish or commence the removal or
demolition of a one-, two-, or three-family residential structure or accessory
structure without first filing with the Code Enforcement Manager an application
in writing and obtaining a formal demolition permit. 
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.02  COMPLETION OF WORK ALREADY AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this Building Code shall require changes in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure or portion thereof
for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or which has been
otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been actually
begun within ninety (90) days after this Building Code becomes effective, and
if the entire building or structure shall be completed, as authorized, within
one (1) year thereafter.
 
1311.03  APPLICATION FORM.
   An application for a plan approval shall be submitted in such form as the
Chief Building Official may prescribe.  Such application shall contain the full
names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and, if the owner is a
corporate body, of its responsible officer.  The application shall also
describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information
as may be required by the Chief Building Official for an intelligent
understanding of the work proposed.
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1311.04  PERSONS ELIGIBLE TO MAKE APPLICATION.
   Applications shall be made by the owner, lessee or agent of either, or the
architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. 
If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall
be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee or the person
making the application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee
and that the person making the application is authorized to make such
application.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person listed as a non-
compliant person ineligible to receive building permits by the Clark County
Department of Building Regulations shall be eligible to apply for or receive a
building permit issued by the City in such person's capacity as an agent,
architect, engineer, or builder. 
(Ord. 04-133.  Passed 4-20-04.)
 
1311.05  AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION.
   Nothing in this Building Code shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an
application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time before
the completion of the work for which the permit was issued.  Such amendments
shall be filed with and shall be deemed a part of the original application, if
approved before the certificate of occupancy has been issued.  Otherwise, a new
application for such alteration shall be made and a new permit shall be
secured.
 
1311.06  PLANS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   Applications for plan approval shall be accompanied by drawings of the
proposed work, drawn to scale, showing when necessary, floor plans, sections,
elevations, structural details, computations and stress diagrams, and such
other information as the Chief Building Official may require.
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1311.07  PLOT PLAN.
   When required by the Chief Building Official, a plot plan shall be submitted
in a form and size designated by him for filing permanently with the plan
approval, drawn to scale, with all dimensions figured, showing accurately the
size and exact location of all proposed new construction and the relation to
other existing or proposed buildings or structures on the same lot and other
buildings or structures on adjoining property within fifteen (15) feet of the
property lines.  The plot plan shall show the buildings or structures to be
demolished and the buildings or structures on the same lot that are to remain.
(Ord. 10-97. Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1311.08  ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall examine, or cause to be examined,
applications for plan approval, within a reasonable time after filing.  If,
after examination, he finds no objections to the same and it appears that the
proposed construction or work will be safe, he shall approve such application
and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable.  If
examination reveals otherwise, he shall reject such application, note his
findings in a written report to be attached to the application and deliver a
copy to the applicant.
 
   (b)   The Code Enforcement Manager shall examine, or cause to be examined,
applications for demolition permits for one-, two-, or three-family structures
or accessory structures within a reasonable time after filing.  If, after
examination, he finds no objections to the same and it appears that the
proposed demolition or work will be safe, he shall approve such application and
issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable.  If examination
reveals otherwise, he shall reject such application, note his findings in a
written report to be attached to the application and deliver a copy to the
applicant.
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1311.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official may revoke a permit or approval issued in
case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
 
   (b)   The Code Enforcement Manager may revoke a demolition permit or
approval for a one-, two-, or three-family structure or accessory structure in
case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.10  APPROVAL OF PERMIT IN PART.
   Nothing in this Building Code shall be construed to prevent the Chief
Building Official from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a
building or structure before the entire plans and detailed statements of such
building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been submitted for the same and have
been found to comply with this Building Code.
 
1311.11  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   All work performed under a permit issued by the Chief Building Official or
the Code Enforcement Manager shall conform to the approved application and
plans, and approved amendments thereto.  The permit holder is responsible for
scheduling all applicable inspections to identify compliance with code
requirements.  No work for which a permit has been issued shall be concealed
without prior inspection and/or approval by the appropriate inspector.  The
location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot plan or an
approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly adhered to.
(Ord. 03-384.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
1311.12  REDUCING OR DIMINISHING LOT AREA.
   No person shall reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot for which a
plot plan has been filed and has been used as the basis for a plan approval,
unless a revised plot plan showing the proposed changes in conditions has been
filed and approved; provided that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced
by reason of a street opening or widening or other public improvement.
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1311.13  SIGNATURE TO PERMIT.
   Every permit issued by the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement
Manager under the provisions of this Building Code shall have the signature of
the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager affixed thereto;
but this shall not prevent the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement
Manager from authorizing a subordinate to affix the Chief Building Official or
the Code Enforcement Manager's signature. 
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.14  PLANS APPROVAL AND PERMIT EXPIRATION; EXTENSION; WORK DELAY.
   The approval of plans or drawings and specifications or data pursuant to
this chapter shall terminate and become void if construction, erection,
alteration or other work upon the building has not commenced within twelve
months of the approval of such plans, drawings, specifications and data.  A
permit must be obtained prior to commencement of work.
 
   A permit expires on the last day of the twelfth month following the date of
issuance of the permit.  All construction, erection, alteration and other work
authorized by a permit must be completed, a final inspection conducted, and all
work approved  prior to expiration of the permit.  Two extensions of a permit
shall be granted for six months each, if requested by the owner or permit
holder at least ten days in advance of the expiration date of the permit and
upon payment of a fee for each extension of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
 
   Exceptions are:
   (a)   Residential heating and air conditioning permits will expire 90 days
following the date of issuance.  One extension of a permit can be granted for
90 days if requested by the owner or permit holder at least ten days in advance
of the expiration date of the permit and approved by the chief building
official and upon payment of a fee for the extension of one hundred dollars
($100.00)
   (b)   Residential electrical permits will expire 90 days following the date
of issuance.  One extension of a permit can be granted for 90 days if requested
by the owner or permit holder at least ten days in advance of the expiration
date of the permit and approved by the chief building official and upon payment
of a fee for the extension of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
      (Ord. 03-384.  Passed 11-25-03.)
 
1311.15  POSTING OF PERMIT.
   A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection
during the prosecution of the work and until the completion of the same.  A
certified copy of the approved plans shall also be kept on the premises at all
times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof.
 
1311.16  COMMENCEMENT NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
   The Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager shall be given
at least twenty-four (24) hours notice of the starting of work under a permit. 
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.17  DEMOLITION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Permits shall be obtained when any portion of a structure is removed,
except for porches whose removal will have no effect on the structural
integrity of the main structure.  Notwithstanding any provision in Section
1311.14, a demolition permit shall become invalid ninety (90) days after its
issuance, and special permits issued pursuant to Section
1323.08(a) which become invalid upon the expiration of the time stated on such
special permit.  However, upon presentation of substantial reasons for
incompletion, the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager may
give extensions.
 
   (b)   Permits for the demolition of commercial or residential buildings do
not relieve the owner or contractor of the requirement to submit a
"Notification of Demolition and Renovation" to the Regional Air Pollution
Control Agency (RAPCA).
(Ord. 97-412.  Passed 11-25-97.)
 
   (c)   Utility companies and the City shall be notified for shut-off of
services.
 
   (d)   Barricades shall be erected around the demolition site when required
by the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager.
 
   (e)   A traffic plan shall be submitted prior to demolition for approval by
the Service Department, Police Division and Fire Division.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
   (f)   All sewer lines shall be capped by a method approved by the Service
Director. Installed caps shall be approved by a City inspector before backfill
is started.
(Ord. 15-104. Passed 4-14-15.)
 
   (g)   All necessary precautions shall be taken to comply with the following:
      (1)   No person may cause or permit the handling, transporting, or
storage of any material in a manner which allows or may allow particulate
matter to become airborne in such quantities and concentrations that it remains
visible in the ambient air beyond the premises where it originates.
      (2)   No person shall cause or permit a building or its appurtenances or
a road, or a driveway, or an open area to be constructed, used, repaired or
demolished without applying all such reasonable measures as may be required to
prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
      (3)   The City may require such reasonable measures as may be necessary
to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne including but not limited
to paving or frequent cleaning of roads, driveways and parking lots;
application of dust-free surfaces; application of water; and the planting and
maintenance of vegetative ground cover.
         (Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
      (4)   When dust, fumes, gases, mist, odorous matter, vapors or any
combination thereof escape from a building or equipment in such manner and
amount as to cause a nuisance or to violate any provision of this section, the
Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager may order that the
building or equipment be tightly closed and ventilated in such a way that all
air and gases and air or gas-borne material leaving the building or equipment
are treated by removal or destruction of air contaminants before discharge to
the open air.
 
   (h)   Approval shall be obtained from the Police and Fire Divisions and
Community Development Department prior to the use of explosives.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
   (i)   All buildings, structures and parts thereof, including foundation
walls, columns, piers, partitions and retaining walls shall be removed to a
level at least twenty-four (24) inches below finish grade unless otherwise
approved by the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager.
 
   (j)   Garage foundations and concrete slabs found in good condition may
remain if approved by the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement
Manager provided all anchor bolts and protrusions above grade level are
removed.
 
   (k)   Basement floors and in ground concrete slabs shall be broken-up.  All
Ohio Basic Building Code demolition regulations shall be applied where
warranted.
 
   (l)   Inspection of the excavation shall be made by a City inspector prior
to backfill.
 
   (m)   All demolition debris shall be quickly removed from the site.  All
lumber or materials kept for re-use shall be neatly stacked twelve (12) inches
aboveground.
 
   (n)   On site burning of materials shall not be permitted.
 
   (o)   All excavations and depressions shall be filled with inorganic
material not exceeding sixteen (16) inches by sixteen (16) inches by sixteen
(16) inches in size.  Backfill material and method of placement shall be
approved and inspected by the Service Director or designee and Chief Building
Official and/or the Code Enforcement Manager.  (See Chapter
923 of the Codified Ordinances.)
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
   (p)   The Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager and
Service Director or designee shall approve the final grading plan.  Finished
grade shall consist of a four (4) inch surface layer of soil, seeded and
mulched to reduce the germination and propagation of weeds or noxious
vegetation, and to prevent fugitive dust conditions and soil erosion, unless
otherwise approved by the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
   (q)   All applicable State and City laws and ordinances shall be complied
with in order to protect property and public health and safety.
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.18  STOP WORK ORDER.
   (a)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, by reason of
directive or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this
Building Code, or the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public
safety and welfare, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped
and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has
been corrected.
 
   (b)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Manager, by reason of
directive or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this
Building Code, or the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public
safety and welfare, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped
and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has
been corrected, as it pertains to the removal or demolition of a one-, two-, or
three-family structure or an accessory structure.
(Ord. 93-222.  Passed 6-29-93.)
 
1311.19  CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   No building or structure shall be occupied for which a building permit was
required without first obtaining a certificate of use and occupancy signed by
the Chief Building Official.
 
1311.20  REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 10-97; MARCH 16, 2010.
 
1311.21  ENDORSEMENTS ON CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall provide each certificate of use and
occupancy approved by the Chief Building Official to the Community Development
Director or designee and to the Service Director or designee prior to
delivering the certificate of use and occupancy to the owner of the building or
structure to which the certificate of use and occupancy pertains.
   (b)   Approval required to occupy.  No building or structure in whole or in
part shall be used or occupied until the Community Development Director or
designee and the Service Director or designee have each endorsed their approval
on that back of the certificate of use and occupancy, certifying that the use
of the building or structure and the premises upon which the building or
structure is situated is in compliance with Parts Nine, Eleven, and Twelve of
the City's Codified Ordinances.  The building owner shall only use the
structure in compliance with the certificate of use and occupancy and any
stated conditions therein.  The structure and all approved building service
equipment shall be maintained in accordance with the approval.
(Ord. 08-353. Passed 12-9-08; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
1311.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1313
Permit Fees
 
1313.01   Permit fees generally.
1313.02   Fees to be additive.
1313.03   New construction and additions.
1313.04   Determining construction costs/valuation.
1313.05   Permit fees for buildings and structures.
1313.06   Plans review fee.
1313.07   Requested inspection fee.
1313.08   Investigation charge of illegal or unauthorized work.
1313.09   Demolition fee.
1313.10   Certificate of occupancy/temporary certificate of occupancy.
1313.11   Signs and outdoor advertising display.
1313.12   Swimming pools.
1313.13   Moving buildings over public street or alley.
1313.14   Electric permit fees.
1313.15   Heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation permit fees.
1313.16   Fire detection/suppression permit fees.
1313.17   Reinspection fee.
1313.18   Engineering plan review and inspection fees for commercial and
industrial properties and public improvements.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Appeal filing fee - see BLDG.
1315.10
Contractor licensing fees - see BLDG.
1327.06(b)
Plumbing permits and fees - see BLDG. Ch.
1369
1313.01  PERMIT FEES GENERALLY.
   A permit shall not be issued until the fee prescribed therefor has been paid
to the City Treasurer.  The fee to be paid for a permit authorized by this
Building Code shall be determined by the Manager of Inspection Services
according to the schedule of fees as hereafter set forth, and shall be noted on
the permit form.
(Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
 
1313.02  FEES TO BE ADDITIVE.
   The fee hereafter set forth shall be additive and, unless otherwise
specifically provided, separate fees shall be paid for each of the items
listed.
(Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
 
1313.03  NEW CONSTRUCTION AND ADDITIONS.
   (a)   The provisions of Section
1313.04(a) shall be used in determining the construction cost/valuation for new
construction and additions.  The determined value of the building or structure
may not be the actual value or cost of construction.
(Ord. 02-476.  Passed 12-17-02.)
 
   (b)   The floor area of a building or structure or addition thereto shall be
determined from the outside perimeter of the building, structure or addition at
each story exclusive of any unoccupied or uninhabited basement, cellar, attic
or roof structure. 
(Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
 
1313.04  DETERMINING CONSTRUCTION COSTS/VALUATION.
   (a)   Effective on and after January 1, 2005, the fee for a permit for a new
building or structure or an addition to an existing building or structure shall
be based upon the construction costs of the building or structure as determined
from the following Type of Construction Factor Table for Commercial/Industrial
Projects OR Residential Building Square Foot Construction Cost Table.
 
 
TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION FACTOR TABLE
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS
                                                         TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION
USE GROUPS            NAMES                              (per square foot)
                                                         1    2-3-4 5
A-1, A-4              Assembly, Theaters with stage      1.71 1.49  1.29
A-2, A-3, A-5, E      Assembly, Nightclubs, Restaurants, 1.40 1.21  1.01
                      Churches, Educational, Amusement
B, M                  Business, Mercantile               1.11 .93   .72
F-1, F-2, H, S-1, S-2 Factories, High Hazard, Storage    .74  .58   .43
I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4    Institutional                      1.81 1.26  1.14
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4    Hotels, Multi-Family, Residential  1.08 .94   .79
U, Misc.              Utility, Miscellaneous             .57  .45   .31
NOTES:   1.  R-4 Accessory Structures (Commercial, Multi-Family).20
      2.  Unfinished Basements (all use groups)              .20
 
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING SQUARE FOOT
CONSTRUCTION COST TABLE (except roofing)
(1)  Habitable Areas    $45.00 per square foot
(2)  Non-Habitable Areas$25.00 per square foot
   (b)   The fee for a permit for the repair or alteration of an existing
building or structure shall be determined on the basis of the actual cost of
the work performed.  Each applicant for a permit shall present a contract or
contractor's proposal or make a sworn statement of affirmation, in writing,
setting forth, in accordance with a bona fide estimate, the total value of the
proposed alteration, repair or installation, including the cost of any and all
plumbing, electrical, heating and other mechanical equipment, devices,
appliances, materials, etc., which will be incorporated therein, and also the
value of all labor, regardless of who is to do the work or make the
installations.
(Ord. 05-186.  Passed 7-12-5.)
 
1313.05  PERMIT FEES FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Effective on and after January 1, 2004, the fee for a permit for the
construction of a new commercial building or structure, or for an addition to
an existing commercial building or structure, or for the repair or alteration
of an existing commercial building or structure shall be one-hundred dollars
($100.00) per application plus the following fee based upon the total cost of
constructing, altering, or repairing such building or structure as determined
by Section
1313.04.  The fee for a permit for the construction of a new residential
building or structure, or for an addition to an existing residential building
or structure, or for the repair or alteration of an existing residential
building or structure shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per application plus the
following fee based upon the total cost of constructing, altering, or repairing
such building or structure as determined by Section
1313.04.  The building fee is obtained by using the following formulas:
 
For all commercial building permits (except roofing permits): 
   Gross Area (in square feet)  x  Construction Factor  x  71  x    .0045
   A three-percent assessment fee for OBBS based on subtotal of building fees. 
If project valuation is $30,000 or less, the permit fee will be a minimum of
$135 plus associated fees.
 
For all residential building permits (except roofing permits):
     Habitable areas     Gross Area (in square feet)  x  $45  x  .0045
     Non-Habitable areas     Gross Area (in square feet)  x  $25  x  .0045
   A one-percent assessment fee for OBBS based on subtotal of building fees. 
If project valuation is less than $30,000, the permit fee will be a minimum of
$135 plus associated fees.
 
For all commercial roofing permits:
   Re-roof      Number of squares  x  $100  x  .0045
   Tear off and resheet   Number of squares  x  $200  x  .0045
The minimum fee for a commercial roofing permit shall be $45.
Ord. 07-82.  Passed 03-27-07.)
 
1313.06  PLANS REVIEW FEE.
   Effective on and after January 1, 2004, when plans are required to be
submitted by the Building Code, the plan review fee shall be determined as
follows:
 
   Commercial   Minimum of $150 (if plans are required to be submitted)
   Residential   Minimum fee of $100 for Habitable Areas
         Flat fee of $50 for Non-Habitable Areas
 
   Commercial and Residential plans examination fee shall be equal to 50
percent of the building permit fee.
(Ord. 02-476, Passed 12-17-02; Ord. 03-383, Passed 11-25-03.)
 
1313.07  REQUESTED INSPECTION FEE.
   The owner or his authorized agent may request an inspection be made of his
premises for which no inspection fee has been otherwise prescribed by this
chapter and such inspection is not otherwise required by this Building Code.  A
fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) per hour shall be charged for such Building
Code consultation.
(Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
 
1313.08  INVESTIGATION CHARGE OF ILLEGAL OR UNAUTHORIZED WORK.
   When any person, firm, or corporation has commenced work on a project
without first procuring the necessary permit therefor, the Chief Building
Official shall make a thorough investigation to determine whether all work
performed prior to the subsequent issuance date of the specified permit
conforms to all pertinent Ordinances.  The charge for making such
investigations prior to the issuance of the necessary permit shall be equal to
the amount of the permit fee required, but not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00), and shall be in addition to the cost of the permit, but in no event
shall the additional charge for investigation exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), except that the charge for a person who re-roofs his/her own
residence or an accessory building thereto shall be equal to the amount of the
required permit fee, and shall be in addition to the cost of the permit,
without any minimum charge.
(Ord. 92-395.  Passed 12-22-92.)
 
1313.09  DEMOLITION FEE.
   The fee for a permit to demolish a building or structure shall be thirty
dollars ($30.00) per application plus an additional charge as follows:
   (a)   Residential garages/accessory structures (fixed rate) of $45 per
structure
   (b)   All buildings or structures other than residential garages and
accessory structures shall be $15 per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of
the area of the building or structure to be demolished.
      (Ord. 02-476.  Passed 12-17-02.)
 
1313.10  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   The fee for a certificate of occupancy for all buildings and
structures shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
 
   (b)   The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy for all buildings and
structures shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), provided that such
building or structures meets all requirements for the issuance of a Temporary
Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 02-476.  Passed 12-17-02.)
 
1313.11  SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY.
   The fee for a permit to erect, re-erect, alter, repair, place, replace,
hang, rehang, locate, relocate or in any manner display or re-display a sign or
outdoor advertising display shall be based on the total display area of each
face of the sign or outdoor advertising display as follows:
 
    All on-site identifying formal or     $20.00 plus .60 per sq. ft. of
(a) informal billboard, projecting, wall  display area
    or free standing signs
    Temporary signs [to be displayed not
(b) more than thirty (30) days in one (1) $20.00
    year]
The federal and state governments and their political subdivisions shall be
exempt from paying the sign fees imposed under this section.
(Ord. 98-237.  Passed 7-14-98.)
 
1313.12  SWIMMING POOLS.
   The fee for a permit to install a pool over thirty-six (36) inches deep
shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) plus additional charges as follows:
 
(a) Plan review if required               $  50.00
(b) Residential above-ground pool         $  45.00
(c) Residential in-ground pool (unheated) $  90.00
(d) Residential in-ground pool (heated)   $135.00
(e) Commercial pool                       $135.00
(f) Electric (above-ground)               $  45.00
(g) Electric (in-ground)                  $  90.00
(h) Zoning                                $    5.00
(i) Commercial 3 percent OBBS fee         based on subtotal of pool fees
      (Ord. 02-476.  Passed 12-17-02.)
 
1313.13  MOVING BUILDINGS OVER PUBLIC STREET OR ALLEY.
   To move a building from one (1) location to another on or across a public
street or public alley, a fee shall be paid to the Department of Inspection
Services as follows:
 
 
Frame Building (dimensions in feet)                    
Not over 12' high or 12' wide or 22' long             None
Not over 12' high or 20' wide or 22' long             $  50.00
Over 12' high but not over 20' wide or 22' long       $100.00
Not over 2-1/2 stories, but over 20' wide or 22' long $200.00
   See Chapter
1325 for special requirements.
(Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
1313.14  ELECTRIC PERMIT FEES.
 
(a)   Application fee            $  40.00
(b)   Plan review
   Commercial                    $100.00
   Residential                   $  20.00
(c)   Services
   New (3)                       $135.00
      Underground--French (1) $  45.00
   Sub panels--1 to 10           $    5.00 each
   Sub panels--11 and over       $    1.00 each
   Upgrade (1)                   $  45.00
   Reconnect (1)                 $  45.00
   Temporary (1)                 $  45.00
(d)   Alterations/repairs (1)    $  45.00
   New circuits--1 to 10         $    3.00 each
   New circuits--11 and over     $    1.00 each
   Sub panels--1 to 10           $    5.00 each
   Sub panels--11 and over       $    1.00 each
(e)   Commercial refrigeration (1$  45.00
(f)   Sign circuits (1)          $  45.00
(g)   Pools
   Above-ground (1)              $  45.00
   In-ground (+1)  (2)          $  90.00
(h)   Informational inspections  $  45.00
(i)    Investigation fee         $200.00
(j)   Additional inspections     $  45.00
(k)   Commercial 3 percent OBBS fbased on subtotal of fees
NOTES:   1.   Permit holder is responsible for scheduling the final inspection.
      2.   Commercial permit applications must include fault current
calculations and a one-line diagram.
      3.   An additional $45.00 reinspection fee may be imposed for work that
was not properly installed, was not ready for inspection, had changed from the
approved plans, or was not accessible at the time of the inspection.
      4.   Numbers in parenthesis indicate the number of inspections provided.
         (Ord. 06-286.  Passed 7-25-06.)
 
1313.15  HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, REFRIGERATION, AND VENTILATION PERMIT FEES.
 
(a)   Application fee               $  40.00
(b)   Plan review
   Commercial                       $100.00
   Residential                      $  20.00
(c)   Heating/cooling
   New furnace/air handler (2)      $  90.00
   Replacement furnace/air handler ($  45.00
   Unit/radiant heaters (1)         $  45.00
   Additional units                 $    2.00 each
   AC/heat pump (1)                 $  45.00
   Package rooftop units (1)        $  45.00
   Ductwork/alteration (1)          $  45.00
(d)   Fireplace (wood or gas)
   Solid fuel appliance (1)         $  45.00
   Chimney or Chimney Liner (1)     $  45.00
(e)   Ventilation equipment (1)     $  45.00
(f)   Commercial refrigeration      $  45.00
(g)   Informational inspections     $  45.00
(h)   Additional inspections        $  45.00
(i)   Investigation fees            $200.00
(j)   Commercial 3 percent OBBS fee based on subtotal of fees
(k)   Range hoods                   $250.00
NOTES:   1.   Permit holder is responsible for scheduling the final inspection.
      2.   Numbers in parenthesis indicate the number of inspections provided.
      3.   An additional $45.00 reinspection fee may be imposed for work that
was not properly installed, was not ready for inspection, had changed from
approved plans or was not accessible at the time of the inspection.
         (Ord. 06-286.  Passed 7-25-06.)
 
1313.16  FIRE DETECTION/SUPPRESSION PERMIT FEES.
 
(a)   Application fee              $  40.00
(b)   Plan review
     Commercial                   $100.00
     Residential                  $  20.00
(c)   Alarm
   New system                      $150.00/ 10,000 sq. ft. or pt.
   Replace panel                   $150.00/ 10,000 sq. ft. or pt.
   Supervision for tamper/flow (onl$  85.00
(d)   Detection (not part of a new
system)
   Duct smoke detectors            $  45.00 each ($135 maximum)
   Additional devices in existing  $  45.00 each ($135 maximum)
building
   Supervision for tamper/flow (onl$  85.00
(e)   Suppression
   Sprinklers (1 to 4)             $100.00
   Sprinklers (5 to 20)            $150.00
   Sprinklers (21 to 200)          $250.00
   Sprinklers (201 to 300)         $300.00
   Sprinklers (301 to 400)         $350.00
   Sprinklers (401 to 750)         $450.00
   Sprinklers (over 750)           $450.00 (plus $.50 per sprinkler over
                                      750)
   Range hood suppression          $250.00
   Other suppression systems       $250.00
(f)   Informational inspections    $  45.00
(g)   Additional inspections       $  45.00
(h)   Investigation fee            $200.00
(i)   Commercial 3 percent OBBS feebased on subtotal of fees
NOTES:   1.   Permit holder is responsible for scheduling the final inspection.
      2.   An additional $45.00 reinspection fee may be imposed for work that
was not properly installed, was not ready for inspection, had changed from
approved plans or was not accessible at the time of the inspection.
         (Ord. 06-286.  Passed 7-25-06.)
 
1313.17  REINSPECTION FEE.
   A fee of $45.00 shall be charged, in addition to all other fees imposed
under this Chapter, whenever a reinspection is necessary as a result of work
being improperly or incompetently performed or as a result of an inspector
being unable to complete a scheduled inspection through the fault of the permit
applicant or his/her agent.
(Ord. 02-476.  Passed 12-17-02.)
 
1313.18  ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES FOR COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following fees for engineering plan reviews and the listed inspections
shall apply to all properties and construction projects (private and public
improvements); except construction projects for and properties to be used for
one-, two-, and three-family residential dwellings:
 
 
Plan Review fees
(a)   $250/acre for the first five acres ($1250 max.)
(b)   $150/acre for the next five acres ($750 max.)
(c)   $75/acre for any remaining area
Inspection fees
(d)   Water and/or Sanitary Sewer Mains                          (per linear foot) 
                                                                    $2.00
(e)   Sanitary Manholes                                          (each) $100.00
(f)   Water and Sewer Taps                                       $50.00
(g)   Purity Test–original test                                $150.00
(h)   Purity Test–retest (if first original test fails)        $100.00
(i)   Purity Test–retest (if second original test fails)       $200.00
(j)   Pressure Test Water Main–original test                   $100.00
(k)   Pressure Test Water Main–retest (if first original test  $150.00
fails)
(l)   Pressure Test Water Main–retest (if second original test $200.00
fails)
(m)   Water Main Debris Tests                                    $75.00
(n)   Inspector charge for work on Saturday and call in          $65.00/hour
(o)   Inspector charge for work on Sunday and Holidays           $90.00/hour
(p)   Inspector charge for work not during normal work hours     $65.00/hour
All Saturday, Sunday, and holiday inspections fees will be billed at three
hours of services or the actual time the inspector is required to perform
services, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 05-186.  Passed 7-12-05.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1315
Appeals
 
1315.01   Board of Building Appeals established.
1315.02   Appointment.
1315.03   Qualifications.
1315.04   Quorum and organization.
1315.05   Records.
1315.06   Rules and regulations.
1315.07   Power of appeals.
1315.08   Orders.
1315.09   Notice of appeals; records.
1315.10   Stay.
1315.11   Hearing of appeals.
1315.12   Decision on appeal.
1315.13   Appeal from Board decision.
1315.14   Meetings of Board.
1315.15   Reports of Board.
1315.16   Definitions.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Fire insurance proceeds - see Ohio R.C. 3929.86
Nuisance abatement appeal - see BLDG.
1323.06
 
1315.01  BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS ESTABLISHED.
   The Board of Building Appeals is hereby established in the City and shall
consist of five (5) members, who need not be citizens of the City.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.02  APPOINTMENT.
   (a)   The members of the Board of Building Appeals shall be appointed by the
Mayor with consent of the City Commission for terms of five years each.
Vacancies to such Board shall be filled by the City Commission for the
unexpired term.
 
   (b)   If any Board member is absent from three of any six consecutive
regularly scheduled meetings, or if such member is unwilling or unable to
attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public business of
the Board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum, such
member’s office shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the
opportunity to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be
reappointed by a majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance
of his/her term.
(Ord. 04-308.  Passed 10-19-04.)
 
1315.03  QUALIFICATIONS.
   One member shall be an Attorney at Law admitted to the Bar of the State of
Ohio; one shall be a registered Architect; one shall be a registered
professional engineer, specializing in structural engineering; and one shall be
a registered professional engineer specializing in mechanical engineering; 
Each of these four members shall be licensed to practice his profession in the
State of Ohio and shall be a person of recognized ability and broad training
who is experienced in problems and practice incidental to the construction and
equipment of buildings and structures.  One member shall be a representative of
organized labor who is knowledgeable as to the construction and equipment of
buildings and structures. A person who is a member of a City employee’s family,
as defined in Section
111.04, shall not be eligible for service on the Board of Building Appeals.
(Ord. 98-191. Passed 06-02-98. / Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10.12)
 
1315.04  QUORUM AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Board of Building Appeals shall elect from its membership a
Chairman who shall serve for a term of one calendar year.  No person may serve
as Chairman for more than two consecutive calendar terms.    The Chairman shall
not be disqualified by reason of such office from exercising any power as a
member of such Board.  The Chief Building Official of the City or his
designated representative shall serve as Secretary.  The Board shall adopt its
own rulesgoverning its conduct.  At least three members shall be present to
constitute a quorum and in varying the application of or supplementing any
provision of Title One of Part Thirteen of the Codified Ordinances, or of any
rule or regulation of the Board, and in modifying or reversing any order of the
Chief Building Official or any order of the Code Enforcement Manager pertaining
to existing structures, the concurrence of three members of such Board shall be
required.
 
   (b)   No member of any Board shall act in any case in which he has a
personal interest. 
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.05  RECORDS.
   The Secretary of the Board shall make and keep a full and complete record of
all its proceedings, including decisions, with reasons; the vote of each member
participating therein, or the failure of a member to vote; and absences of
members.  Such records shall be open to public inspection.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.06  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Building Appeals shall be, and the same is hereby authorized,
to promulgate rules and regulations governing use of materials and methods of
construction not specifically provided for in this Code.  Such rules and
regulations shall be based upon accepted State and Federal standards and shall
effectuate the intent and purpose of this Code.
   (a)   At least ten-days' notice of intention to adopt, amend or repeal any
rule or regulation shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City.
   (b)   No final action shall be taken upon such rule or regulation until a
public hearing thereon has been held.
   (c)   All adopted rules and regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the office of the Chief Building Official, and shall take effect at
such time as may be fixed by the Board, but in no event less than twenty days
after such publication.
   (d)   A record shall be made of evidence taken by the Board concerning any
rule or regulation.
      (Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.07  POWER OF APPEALS.
   The Board of Building Appeals shall hear and decide all appeals authorized
by Chapters
1301,
1303,
1305,
1323,
1327, and
1361 of the Codified Ordinances.  The Board of Building Appeals shall hear and
decide the appeal of any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Fire
Official in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code,
Part 15 of the Codified Ordinances, or any order or citation issued by the Fire
Official pursuant to the Fire Prevention Code,
Part 15 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.08  ORDERS.
   Each order of the City shall cite the law or rules upon which it was issued
and shall specify what actions are necessary to comply with the applicable
code.  Upon the issuance of an order of the City the owner and occupant/tenant
of the property which is the subject of the order and/or contractors and
workers engaged in the property shall cease with their work until the order is
complied with or until the order is reversed or modified by the Board or a
court of competent jurisdiction.  The order shall include a notice of the
procedure available to appeal an order and the right to a hearing before the
Board if requested within the time period provided in the applicable code.  The
notice shall also inform the party that at the hearing the party may be
represented by counsel, present arguments orally or in writing, and present
evidence and examine witnesses who may appear before the Board.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.09  NOTICE OF APPEALS; RECORDS.
   Appeals shall be made within thirty days after an order of the Chief
Building Official is rendered and within ten days after an order of the Code
Enforcement Manager is rendered by filing a written notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds therefor, with the official whose decision is being
appealed, and the official shall immediately forward the appeal to the Board of
Building Appeals.  Such official shall also forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting a record upon which the action appealed was presented.  The
Secretary of the Board of Building Appeals shall schedule for hearing all
appeals filed at least seven days before the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Board of Building Appeals.  Upon application made by an appellant, and
for good cause shown, the Secretary may continue an appeal until the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Building Appeals.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.10  STAY.
   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the official from whom the appeal is taken shall
file a certificate with the Board of Building Appeals describing the facts
pertinent to and resulting in the action appealed from andstating that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property.  A copy of the certificate shall forthwith be mailed to the
appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal.  The appellant may
seek an immediate hearing before the Board.  After the filing of a certificate,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction upon
application.  The issuance of a "Stop Work Order" is an exception to this
section whereby the filing of an appeal with the Board does not stay the
enforcement of such order.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.11  HEARING OF APPEALS.
   The Board of Building Appeals shall give due notice of hearing times and
dates to the parties and shall decide the same within 30 days after the date of
the hearing.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agency or
attorney.  The fee for filing an appeal with the Board of Building Appeals
shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. 04-223.  Passed 07-13-04.)
 
1315.12  DECISION ON APPEAL.
   (a)   Every decision of the Board of Building Appeals shall be in writing,
and shall indicate the vote of the decision.  Every decision shall be sent by
certified mail or delivered in person to the appellant, and a copy shall be
publicly posted in the City Hall for two weeks after filing.
 
   (b)   The official concerned shall take action immediately in accordance
with the ruling of the Board of Building Appeals.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.13  APPEAL FROM BOARD DECISION.
   A decision of the Board of Building Appeals is a final, appealable decision.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.14  MEETINGS OF BOARD.
   Meetings shall be held once monthly and as many times as necessary upon the
call of the City Manager.  The Chairman and the Secretary may call special
meetings and may cancel the monthly meeting if there is no business for the
Board of Building Appeals to consider.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.15  REPORTS OF BOARD.
   The Board of Building Appeals shall annually, not later than January 31 of
each year, submit a report to the City Commission covering the work of the
Board during the preceding year, and shall incorporate in such report its
recommendations as to desirable amendments of this Code.
(Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
1315.16  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Order" means an adjudication order or a written notice of
corrections.
   (b)   "Personal interest" means any business in which a member of the Board
of Building Appeals has a conflict of interest by association.  "Personal
interest" shall also mean any interest in a matter before the Board of Building
Appeals such that applicable federal, state, or local law would disqualify the
member of the Board of Building Appeals from taking any action pertaining to
such matter.
   (c)   "Work" means the erection, construction, repair, improvement, moving,
alteration, remodeling, removal, or demolition of a building or structure; of a
swimming pool; or of electrical, heating, ventilation or air conditioning
facilities.
      (Ord. 98-191.  Passed 06-02-98.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1317
Gas Piping Code
 
1317.01   Fuel gas code adopted.
1317.02   Permit required.
1317.03   Completion of work already authorized.
1317.04   Application form.
1317.05   Repealed by Ordinance No. 04-247, passed 8-10-04.
1317.06   Amendments to application.
1317.07   Diagram to accompany application.
1317.08   Action on application.
1317.09   Revocation of permit.
1317.10   Compliance with permit.
1317.11   Permit expiration; extensions.
1317.12   Posting of permit.
1317.13   Stop work order.
1317.14   Registration of gas piping installers.
1317.15   Fees.
1317.16   Charge for investigation of illegal work.
1317.17   Delegation of authority.
1317.18   Revocation of gas piping installer’s registration.
1317.99   Penalty.
 
1317.01  FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio, the 2015
International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the International Code Council,
which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set out in this Chapter.
(Ord. 10-97,  Passed 3-16-10; Ord. 18-50, Passed 2-27-18.)
 
1317.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall install new gas line, repair or alter a gas line,
install a gas powered appliance or replace a gas powered appliance without
first filing with the Chief Building Official an application in writing and
obtaining a formal gas piping installation permit.
 
   (b)   Every gas piping installation permit issued by the Chief Building
Official under the provisions of this Gas Piping Code shall have the signature
of the Chief Building Official affixed thereto; but this shall not prevent the
Chief Building Official from authorizing a subordinate to affix the Chief
Building Official's signature. 
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
1317.03  COMPLETION OF WORK ALREADY AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this Gas Piping Code shall require changes in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure or portion thereof
for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or which has been
otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been actually
begun within ninety (90) days after this Gas Piping Code becomes effective, and
if the entire building or structure shall be completed, as authorized, within
one (1) year thereafter.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.04  APPLICATION FORM.
   An application for a gas piping installation permit shall be submitted in
such form as the Chief Building Official may prescribe.  Such application shall
contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and, if
the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officer.  The application
shall also describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional
information as may be required by the Chief Building Official for an
intelligent understanding of the work proposed.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.05  REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 04-247, PASSED 8-10-04.
 
1317.06  AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION.
   Nothing in this Gas Piping Code shall prohibit the filing of amendments to
an application or to a diagram or other record accompanying same, at any time
before the completion of the work for which the gas piping installation permit
was issued.  Such amendments shall be filed with and shall be deemed a part of
the original application; provided that such amendment was made prior to final
testing of the permitted work.  Otherwise, a new application for such
alteration shall be made and a new gas piping installation permit shall be
secured.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.07  DIAGRAM TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a one-line diagram of the
proposed work, showing gas pipe size and length, BTU’s per gas powered
appliance, gas line operating pressure and such other information as the Chief
Building Official may require.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.08  ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   The Chief Building Official shall examine, or cause to be examined,
applications for gas line installation permits, within a reasonable time after
filing.  If, after examination, he finds no objections to the same and it
appears that the proposed installation, alteration or repair will be safe, he
shall approve such application and issue a gas piping installation permit for
the proposed work as soon as practicable.  If examination reveals otherwise, he
shall reject such application, note his findings in a written report to be
attached to the application and deliver a copy to the applicant.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief Building Official may revoke a gas piping installation permit or
approval issued in the event there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or diagrams on which
the permit or approval was based.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
1317.10  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   (a)   All work performed under a permit issued by the Chief Building
Official shall conform to the approved application, approved diagrams, and
approved amendments thereto and all such work shall be performed only by a
registered gas piping installer holding a valid gas piping installer’s
registration issued under this Chapter.  The gas piping installation permit
holder is responsible for scheduling all applicable inspections to identify
whether work complies with Gas Piping Code requirements.  No work for which a
gas piping installation permit has been issued shall be concealed without prior
inspection and/or approval by a City inspector.  The registered gas piping
installer shall provide the equipment necessary to test work: to wit, those
installations, alterations, replacements and repairs authorized by the gas
piping installation permit.  Testing shall be performed in the presence of the
City’s inspector and shall be performed with either a Kuhlman gas pressure gage
or a Magnehelic gas pressure gage.  In the event test results are obtained with
both a Kuhlman gas pressure gage and a Magnehelic gas pressure gage,  the
results produced by the Kuhlman gas pressure gage shall govern.
 
   (b)   No gas line or gas powered appliance shall be put into service until
it has first been inspected by a City inspector and has been approved; however,
a gas service line and construction related gas powered appliances may be
placed in temporary service during construction operations without obtaining an
inspection and approval by a City inspector, provided that a gas piping
installation permit has been obtained for the gas line.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.11  PERMIT EXPIRATION; EXTENSIONS.
   A gas piping installation permit expires on the last day of the twelfth
month following the date of issuance of the gas piping installation permit. 
All installation, alterations, replacements and repairs authorized by a gas
piping installation permit must be completed, a final inspection conducted, and
all work approved prior to expiration of the gas piping installation permit. 
Two extensions of a permit shall be granted for six months each, if requested
by the owner or permit holder at least ten days in advance of the expiration
date of the gas piping installation permit and upon payment of a fee for each
extension of seventy five dollars ($75.00).
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.12  POSTING OF PERMIT.
   A copy of the gas piping installation permit shall be kept on the premises
for public inspection during the prosecution of the work and until the
completion and final testing of the same.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.13  STOP WORK ORDER.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, by reason of
directive or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this
Gas Piping Code, or the continuance of work is contrary to public safety and
welfare, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may
require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been
corrected.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.14  REGISTRATION OF GAS PIPING INSTALLERS.
   (a)   No person shall perform work for which a gas piping installation
permit is required unless such person holds a valid gas piping installer’s
registration issued under this Chapter.
 
   (b)   Any person desiring a gas piping installer’s registration shall make
written application therefor with the Chief Building Official.  Every
application shall be on forms prescribed by the Chief Building Official; shall
furnish all information and data required thereby.  No application shall be
required of any person desiring to renew a gas piping installer’s registration
previously issued or renewed provided that the information and data contained
in such person's application therefor is correct or, if not, is corrected by or
at the direction of such person and that all other provisions of this Chapter
are complied with.
 
   (c)   No gas piping installer’s registration shall be issued or continue in
effect unless the applicant shall give evidence that the following items are
valid and remain in effect during the duration of the gas piping installer’s
registration:
      (1)   The payment of a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fee upon
application for a gas piping installer’s registration; and the payment of a two
hundred dollar ($200.00) fee for each renewal thereof.  Payment shall be made
to the City Treasurer.
      (2)   Proof that the applicant holds either:
         (A)   a valid and unexpired Plumbing License issued by the State of
Ohio pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code or
         (B)   a valid and unexpired H/M-1P Install/Replace Gas Service D.O.T.
certification issued pursuant to 49 CFR Part 192.
      (3)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including completed
operations, with a minimum limit of liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage liability.  Such insurance shall provide explosion hazard coverage ("x"
exclusion deleted).  Applicants performing excavation work shall also provide
both collapse and underground hazard coverage ("c" and "u" exclusions deleted).
      (4)   Proof of Workers' Compensation coverage, if coverage is required by
the State of Ohio.
      (5)   City income tax number and social security number.
      (6)   Photo identification of the applicant.
      (7)   The execution by such applicant of a bond in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) with sureties thereon to the approval of the City
Manager.  Such bond shall be conditioned to save the City and its inhabitants
harmless from all loss or damage of whatsoever nature that may result from any
violation by the registered gas piping installer and/or his authorized agents
of any law, ordinance or rule governing work contemplated by the terms of such
gas piping installer’s registration which are then in force or thereafter
established by proper authority.
      (8)   A Police Records check showing no convictions for crimes involving
dishonesty for the preceding five (5) years.
 
   (d)   The Chief Building Official shall issue a certificate of gas piping
installer’s registration to any person who has complied with the provisions of
this section.  Every certificate of gas piping installer’s registration issued
or renewed pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year for
which the same has been issued or last renewed unless otherwise renewed prior
thereto in accordance with the provisions of this section.  No fee required
under the provisions of this section after payment thereof to the City shall be
refunded for any cause whatsoever.
 
   (e)   Holders of a certificate of gas piping installer’s registration may
apply to renew their certificate of gas piping installer’s registration during
the period November 15 through December 31 of the year in which the certificate
of gas piping installer’s registration was issued or previously renewed by
making application for renewal and paying the renewal fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00).  Holders of a certificate of gas piping installer’s
registration may request an extension of the registration expiration date by
filing with the Chief Building Official a request for an extension citing the
reason an extension should be granted and by paying an extension request fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  For good cause shown, the Chief Building
Official may grant an extension of the registration expiration date (either
prospective or retroactive) of up to thirty days.  A certificate of gas piping
installer’s registration which is permitted to expire may not be renewed and a
holder of an expired certificate of gas piping installer’s registration who
wishes to become registered must apply for a new certificate of gas piping
installer’s registration pursuant to the provisions of this Section and pay the
application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
   
1317.15  FEES.
   (a)   A gas piping installation permit shall not be issued until the fees
prescribed therefor have been paid to the City Treasurer.  The fees to be paid
for a gas piping installation permit authorized by this Gas Piping Code shall
be determined by the Chief Building Official according to the schedule of fees
as hereafter set forth, and shall be noted on the gas piping installation
permit form.
 
   (b)   The fees hereinafter set forth shall be additive and, unless otherwise
specifically provided, separate fees shall be paid for each of the items
listed.
 
   (c )   The fee for a gas piping installation permit shall be forty dollars
($40.00) plus additional charges as follows:
 
(1)   Plan/diagram review              
     Commercial                      $100.00
     Residential                     $  20.00
(2)   Gas (NG or LP) piping inspection$  45.00 ea
(3)   Application feed inspection     $  10.00 ea
(4)   Rough inspection                $  45.00 ea
(5)   Informational inspections       $  45.00 ea
(6)   Additional inspections          $  45.00 ea
(7)   Commercial, 3 percent of OBBS febased on fees subtotal
(8)   Residential, 1 percent of OBBS fbased on fees subtotal
 
The minimum fee for the issuance of any gas piping installation permit pursuant
to this Chapter shall be eighty five dollars ($85.00).
(Ord. 10-97.  Passed 3-16-10.)
 
1317.16  CHARGE FOR INVESTIGATION OF ILLEGAL WORK.
   When any person, firm, or corporation has commenced work on a project
without first procuring the necessary gas piping installation permit therefor,
the Chief Building Official shall make a thorough investigation to determine
whether all work performed prior to the subsequent issuance date of the gas
piping installation permit conforms to all pertinent Ordinances.  The charge
for making such investigations prior to the issuance of the necessary gas
piping installation permit shall be equal to the amount of the gas piping
installation permit fee required, but not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00), and shall be in addition to the cost of the gas piping installation
permit, but in no event shall the additional charge for investigation exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.17  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   As used in this chapter, "Chief Building Official," when concerning the
alteration and repair of one-, two-, and three-family buildings and accessory
structures rehabilitated with funds from the Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development, refers to the Housing Rehabilitation Coordinator of the City
of Springfield.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.18  REVOCATION OF GAS PIPING INSTALLER’S REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The City’s Director of Community Development is authorized and
empowered to revoke, modify, or suspend a gas piping installer’s registration
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for any of the following acts or
omissions of the holder of any such gas piping installer’s registration: 
fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation of any facts in obtaining a gas piping
installer’s registration; obtaining a contract for work authorized under any
such license by fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation of facts; negligence or
incompetence in the practice of contracting or the performance of any work;
willful or fraudulent material departure from the plans or specifications
prescribed for any work undertaken by a gas piping installer’s registration
holder; violation of or disregard for any provision of law or ordinance or rule
or regulation; non-compliance resulting in injury or damage to any person or to
the public; or giving false information on an application for a gas piping
installation permit.
 
   (b)   The City’s Director of Community Development is authorized and
empowered to revoke a gas piping installer’s registration pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The gas piping installer’s registration holder no longer holds
either a valid and unexpired Plumbing License issued the State of Ohio pursuant
to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code or a valid and unexpired H/M-1P
Install/Replace Gas Service D.O.T. certification issued pursuant to 49 CFR Part
192, or
      (2)   The gas piping installer’s registration holder no longer has in
effect the insurance described in Section
1317.14, or
      (3)   The gas piping installer’s registration holder no longer has in
effect the workers compensation coverage described in Subsection
1317.14, or
      (4)   The gas piping installer’s registration holder no longer has in
effect the bond described in Subsection
1317.14, or
      (5)   The gas piping installer’s registration holder has been convicted
of a crime involving dishonesty within the preceding three (3) years , or
      (6)   any combination of the foregoing items (1) through (5).
 
   (c)   No such gas piping installer’s registration shall be revoked without
at least fifteen (15) days advance written notice by the City’s Director of
Community Development to the gas piping installer’s registration holder to such
effect and without affording to such gas piping installer’s registration holder
the opportunity to appeal to the Board of Building Appeals by submitting the
appeal in writing and stating the reason for the appeal.  Appeals must be filed
with the Secretary of the Board of Building Appeals within ten (10) days after
receipt of notice of revocation.
      (Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
1317.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. 04-161.  Passed 5-18-04.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1321
Historic Landmarks Commission
 
1321.01   Establishment of Historic Landmarks Commission.
1321.02   Purpose.
1321.03   Definitions.
1321.04   Historic Landmarks Commission composition and terms.
1321.05   Meetings; records; general procedures.
1321.051   Assistance to the Historic Landmarks Commission.
1321.06   Duties of the Landmarks Commission.
1321.07   Designation of historic districts and listed properties.
1321.08   Limitations on issuance of building, demolition and sign permits.
1321.09   Issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness.
1321.10   Automatic issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness.
1321.11   Exclusions and exemptions.
1321.99   Penalty.
 
1321.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
   In recognition of the need for the establishment of a public body that will
provide for the protection and enhancement of the distinctive character of the
historic resources of Springfield and for the objective review of alternatives
to proposed alteration or demolition of certain notable structures, works of
art, objects or areas within the City of Springfield, the City Commission
hereby adopts this chapter and establishes the Springfield Historic Landmarks
Commission.
(Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
1321.02  PURPOSE.
   The City Commission, being mindful of the proud history of this community,
hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the preservation, protection,
perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings, structures, works of art and
other objects having a special historical, community or aesthetic interest or
value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health,
prosperity, safety and welfare of the people.  The purpose of this chapter is
to:
   (a)   Maintain and enhance the distinctive character of the historic
resources of Springfield by establishment of procedures whereby certain areas,
places, buildings, structures and works of art which reflect elements of the
City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history shall be
allowed that measure of protection afforded by a thorough study of alternatives
to incompatible alterations or demolition before such acts are performed;
   (b)   Contribute to the economic, recreational, cultural and educational
development of the City of Springfield by:
      (1)   Stimulating business and attracting industry;
      (2)   Protecting and enhancing attractions to residents, tourists and
visitors;
      (3)   Stabilizing and improving property values;
      (4)   Enhancing the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and
interest of the City of Springfield;
      (5)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of
the past;
      (6)   Facilitating the rehabilitation and revitalization of certain older
neighborhoods;
      (7)   Promoting the use and preservation of historic sites and structures
for the education and general welfare of the people of Springfield.
         (Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
1321.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Alter" or "alteration" means a change or re-arrangement in the
structural parts or building service equipment or an enlargement whether by
extending on a side or by increasing the height or the moving from one (1)
location or position to another.  For the purpose of this chapter, alterations
shall include a change in design, color, texture, material or exterior
feature.  Ordinary maintenance to correct any deterioration, decay or damage to
a structure and to restore the structure to its condition prior to such
deterioration, decay or damage are excluded from the definition of
"alteration", provided such work does not involve a change in design, color,
texture, material or exterior feature.
   (b)   "Applicant" means any owner, owners, association, partnership or
corporation who applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness.
   (c)   "Landmarks Commission" means the Historic Landmarks Commission of the
City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (d)   "City Commission" means the City Commission for the City of
Springfield.
   (e)   "Exterior features" means the architectural style, general design and
general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure including
but not limited to windows, doors, porches, storefronts, cornices, siding
materials and decorative trim.
   (f)   "Historic District" means any area designated by the Landmarks
Commission, under the provisions of this chapter, which contains properties of
special character, historic, aesthetic or architectural value.
   (g)   "Listed property" means any property which has special character,
historic, aesthetic or architectural value as part of the heritage, development
or cultural characteristics of the City of Springfield, or the United States
and which has been designated as a listed property pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
   (h)   "Member" means any member of the Landmarks Commission.
   (i)   "Owner" means the owner of record and such term includes the plural as
well as the singular.
   (j)   "Sign" means any object or device or part thereof, visible outdoors
which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to
an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service or
event.  For the purposes of this chapter, signs do not include:  flags of
nations, states and cities, fraternal, religious or civic organizations;
merchandise, pictures or models of products and services incorporated as part
of a window display; works of art which in no way identify a product; national,
state, city, religious, fraternal, professional and civic symbols and crests.
   (k)   "Environmental feature" means any natural or man-made object,
attachment or landscaping that is intended as part of the visual composition of
a street or site, including but not limited to fences, sidewalks, driveways,
exterior lighting fixtures, street trees, curbs and streets, and paving
materials.
   (l)   "Substantial hardship" means a condition unique to the property under
consideration and a condition under which an action by the Landmarks Commission
would force the applicant to suffer practical difficulty and denial of the
reasonable use of the property.
      (Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
1321.04  HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION COMPOSITION AND TERMS.
   (a)   The Historic Landmarks Commission shall consist of seven (7) members
who shall be appointed by the City Commission.  All members shall have, to the
highest extent possible, a recognized knowledge of and known interest in
architectural preservation and design together with a determination to work for
the overall improvement of the quality of Springfield's physical environment. 
Membership on the Landmarks Commission shall include:  three (3) at-large
members that represent the disciplines of architecture, history or
preservation; and four (4) citizens-at-large.  Nominations may be solicited
from the local chapters of the American Institute of Architects, Clark County
Bar Association, Clark County Board of Realtors, Clark County Historical
Society, South Fountain Preservation, Inc., and other groups or organizations
that might have an interest in the Commission.
(Ord. 11-304. Passed 11-1-11.)
 
   (b)   Each of the members shall be appointed to a term of three (3) years. 
No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms.  After a member has
served during two (2) consecutive terms he shall be ineligible for
reappointment to the Landmarks Commission until one (1) year has expired since
his last date of service on the Commission.
(Ord. 94-139. Passed 4-19-94.) 
 
   (c)   Any vacancy on the Landmarks Commission shall be filled as in the case
of the original appointment, as set forth herein for the unexpired term of the
member whose vacancy is so filled.
 
   (d)   All members of the Landmarks Commission shall serve without
compensation and shall be subject to removal from office by a majority of the
City Commission.
 
   (e)   Persons eligible for service on the Landmarks Commission shall meet
the following qualifications:
      (1)   Persons serving on another City board or commission shall not be
eligible to serve on the Landmarks Commission.
      (2)   A person who is a member of a City employee’s family, as defined in
Section
111.04, or an elected public officials shall not be eligible to serve on the
Landmarks Commission.
         (Ord. 12-110. Passed 4-10-12.)
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided herein, if any member of the Landmarks
Commission shall fail to meet any of the qualifications stated in subsections
(e)(1) and (2) hereof his office shall immediately become vacant.
      (4)   The City Commission, by ordinance and upon finding that the
particular expertise of a potential appointee or member is needed on the
Landmarks Commission, may waive any or all of the requirements of subsection
(e)(1) and subsection (f) hereof for such appointee or member.
 
   (f)   At least four (4) of the seven (7) members of the Landmarks Commission
shall be electors of the City.
 
   (g)   If any Landmarks Commission member is absent from three (3) of any six
(6) consecutive commission meetings, or if such member is unwilling or unable
to attend a regularly scheduled prearranged discussion of the public business
of his board which fails to qualify as a "meeting" for lack of quorum, his
office shall immediately become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity
to explain his absence to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a
majority vote of the City Commission to complete the balance of his term.
(Ord. 95-96.  Passed 3-14-95.)
 
1321.05  MEETINGS; RECORDS; GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The Landmarks Commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson
and such other officers as it may deem necessary.  No chairperson shall serve
more than two (2) years during a period of six (6) consecutive years.  The term
"year" means twelve (12) consecutive months.  The Commission shall adopt rules
and regulations consistent with law and ordinance.  Meetings of the Commission
shall be held once each month, and at such additional times as the Commission
may determine; provided, however, the chairperson may cancel a meeting if no
member has proposed business to be conducted at the meeting.  The time of
regular meetings shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the
Commission.  Special meetings shall be called by the chairperson.  There shall
be a fixed place of meeting.
 
   (b)   The Landmarks Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the action of the Commission and the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of all of its official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in
the Department of Community Development.  The presence of four (4) members
shall constitute a quorum.  The Landmarks Commission shall act by resolution
and a copy of each resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the Office of the
Clerk of the City Commission.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1321.051 ASSISTANCE TO THE HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to furnish the
Historic Landmarks Commission with plats, plans, drawings, and other data as it
may require, and to furnish the commission administrative and professional
assistance, and to designate a Secretary of the Historic Landmarks Commission,
as the City Manager may approve.  All other offices and employees of the City
shall render the commission such assistance as the City Commission may from
time to time direct.
(Ord. 11-304. Passed 11-1-11.)
 
1321.06  DUTIES OF THE LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
   The Landmarks Commission shall have the following duties in addition to
those otherwise specified in this chapter:
   (a)   The Landmarks Commission shall function to improve the quality of life
in this City by striving to further and achieve the spirit and purpose of this
chapter.
      (Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
   (b)   The Landmarks Commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted or
assist in the conduct of a continuing survey of all structures, works of art,
objects or areas of architectural, historic or aesthetic interest in the City
of Springfield, which the Landmarks Commission believes, on the basis of
information available or presented to it, are or will be eligible for
designation for the Local Register of Historic Properties and/or the National
Register as a listed property or as a historic district.
      (Ord. 85-485.  Passed 9-10-85.)
   (c)   The Landmarks Commission shall work for the continuing education of
the citizens of Springfield with respect to the architectural and historic
heritage of the City and the listed properties and historic districts
designated under the provisions of this chapter, and shall make every effort to
improve the overall design and environmental awareness of the people.
   (d)   The Landmarks Commission shall keep a current register of all listed
properties and historic districts.  All listed properties shall be given a
number, a description accompanied by a photograph, and the reasons for the
listing.  All historic districts shall also be given a number, a description
and representative photographs including streetscapes, a map outlining the
boundaries and the reasons for listing.  This register shall be made available
to the public and to any other interested party, and shall be located in the
Department of Community Development.
      (Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
   (e)   The Landmarks Commission shall work cooperatively with planners,
developers, the City, and others in long-range planning efforts to insure the
inclusion of historic preservation values in such planning efforts.
   (f)   The City shall seek the recommendation of the Landmarks Commission on
all planning and development matters affecting designated or potential listed
properties and historic districts.
   (g)   The Landmarks Commission shall establish criteria, rules and
regulations not otherwise included in this chapter for evaluating applications
of Certificates of Appropriateness submitted to it and the manner in which they
shall be processed.  These criteria shall include specific considerations to be
given the building materials, landscaping, signs, lighting and architectural
style of the listed properties.
   (h)   The Landmarks Commission may make recommendations to the City
Commission for additions or revisions to this chapter.
   (i)   The Landmarks Commission may delegate such ministerial duties to the
Inspection Services Division of the Department of Community Development as the
Landmarks Commission deems necessary to enable the Landmarks Commission to
carry out its duties under this chatper.  In addition, the Landmarks Commission
may employ on a permanent or part time basis technical experts and such other
employees as may be required to perform its duties, within the appropriations
made available therefor, and with the approval of the City Commission.
      (Ord. 94-139.  Passed 4-19-94.)
   (j)   The Landmarks Commission shall participate in the National Register
process in the following manner:
      Properties that appear to meet the criteria, or that have been determined
eligible for listing in the National Register by the Secretary of the Interior,
shall be nominated by the Landmarks Commission or any interested person to the
National Register using the criteria and designation procedures of Section
1321.07 and the Department of the Interior.
      The Landmarks Commission shall review all National Register nominations
for properties within its jurisdiction.
      (1)   When National Register reviews are on the agenda for Landmarks
Commission review, notice will be published by release to the local news media,
through City publications, or other means.  The public notice shall list the
proposed nominations with addresses, and shall encourage public input prior to
the state review board.
      (2)   The Landmarks Commission shall submit a report to the State
Preservation Office prior to the final review of the Ohio Historic Site
Preservation Advisory Board (OHSPAB) regarding the eligibility of each property
or district proposed for nomination to the National Register within its
jurisdiction.  This report shall include the recommendation of the Landmarks
Commission and the Mayor regarding the eligibility of the property.  The report
shall be made available for public inspection.
      (3)   If both the Landmarks Commission and the Mayor recommend that a
property not be nominated, the Landmarks Commission will so inform the property
owner(s) and the state review board.  Such property will not be nominated
unless an appeal is filed with the State Historic Preservation Officer.
      (4)   If either or both the Landmarks Commission and the Mayor agree that
the property should be nominated, the report of their opinion shall be
forwarded to the State Preservation Office within sixty (60) days, and the
nomination will be scheduled for final review by the State Preservation Office.
      (5)   Either the Landmarks Commission or the Mayor may appeal the final
decision of the State Preservation Office under the aforementioned State
Preservation Office appeals procedure.
      The City may elect to send a supporting letter signed by both the Mayor
and the president of the Landmarks Commission with the nomination when it is
first submitted to the State Preservation Office.  The requirements of
subsection (j)(1) hereof shall apply.  Upon written agreement between the City
and the State Preservation Office, the City may elect to assume responsibility
for notification of property owners and the public throughout the nomination
process.  If such an agreement is entered into, the City shall meet the public
notice requirements specified by the National Register nomination procedures of
the Department of the Interior and the State Preservation Office.
      (Ord. 85-485.  Passed 9-10-85.)
 
1321.07  DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LISTED PROPERTIES.
   (a)   In considering the designation of any area, place, building,
structure, work of art or similar object in the City of Springfield as a listed
property or a Historic District, the Landmarks Commission shall apply the
following criteria with respect to such property.  One (1) or more of the
following must apply:
      (1)   Its character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Springfield, State of Ohio
or the United States;
      (2)   Its location as the site of a significant historic event;
      (3)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the City of Springfield;
      (4)   Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social,
archaeological or historic heritage of the City of Springfield;
      (5)   Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
      (6)   Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen;
      (7)   Its identification as the work of an architect or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the City of
Springfield;
      (8)   Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural
innovation;
      (9)   Its relationship to other distinctive areas which are eligible for
preservation according to a plan based on an historic, cultural or
architectural innovation;
      (10)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristic
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community or the City of Springfield;
      (11)   Its having yielded, or likelihood of yielding, information
important to the understanding of pre-history or history. 
         (Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
      (12)   Its meeting criteria for National Register of Historic Places
designation as listed by the Department of the Interior.
         (Ord. 85-485.  Passed 9-10-85.)
 
   (b)   The Landmarks Commission shall notify the owner of any proposal to
list his property.  Whenever possible, the Landmarks Commission shall secure
the owner's written consent for the proposed designation and upon receipt of
such consent the property shall be listed upon favorable recommendation of the
Landmarks Commission to City Commission and upon approval by City Commission at
a regular or special session of City Commission.
 
   (c)   In the event that such owner shall refuse or decline to give his
written consent to the proposed listing and in the designation of all historic
districts the following procedure shall be followed:
      (1)   The Landmarks Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the
question of the proposed listing, setting forth a date, time and place and
causing written notice to be given to the owner; or in the case of a large
historic district where individual notices may not be practical, notice to be
given through existing neighborhood or other organizations.
         The Landmarks Commission shall cause a legal notice to be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City setting forth the nature of the
hearing, the property or district involved and the date, time and place of the
scheduled public hearing.  These notices shall be given at least two (2) weeks
before the scheduled hearing.
      (2)   The Landmarks Commission shall conduct the public hearing and shall
provide a reasonable opportunity for all interested parties to express their
opinions.  Within fifteen (15) days after the hearing, the Commission shall set
forth in its recommendations such findings of fact which constitute the basis
for its decision and shall transmit such recommendation concerning the proposed
designation to the Clerk of the City Commission.
      (3)   The City Commission shall give due consideration to the findings
and recommendations of the Landmarks Commission, as well as such views as may
have been expressed by persons participating in the hearing before the
Landmarks Commission in making its own determination with respect to the
proposed designation.  The City Commission shall act on the proposed
designation within forty-five (45) days of receipt of recommendations from the
Landmarks Commission.  If City Commission fails to act within forty-five (45)
days, the designation shall be considered to be approved.  The City Commission
may designate a listed property or a Historic District at any regular or
special meeting of the City Commission.
      (4)   After a decision by the City Commission, the Landmarks Commission
shall notify the owner(s) of the decision by the City Commission.
         (Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
   (d)   Local Register of Historic Districts and Structures
      (1)   A.   South Fountain Preservation Area, as described in Ordinance
85-329.
         B.   East High Street District, as described in Ordinance 85-566.
      (2)   A.   Third Presbyterian Church (714 North Limestone Street)
         B.   Bushnell Building (14 East Main Street and 16-18 North Fountain
Avenue)
         C.   Pennsylvania House (1311 West Main Street)
         D.   IOOF Home For The Aged (404 East McCreight Avenue)
         E.   Myers Hall on Wittenberg University's campus
         F.   Old City Hall (117 South Fountain Avenue)
         G.   Springfield News-SunBuilding (202 North Limestone Street),
limited to the original structure completed in 1929 and being the entire length
of the structure that fronts on North Limestone Street and 78 feet of the
structure that fronts on East North Street, measured from the corner of North
Limestone Street and East North Street.
         H.   Gammon House (620 Piqua Place)
            (Ord. 19-66. Passed 3-12-19.)
 
1321.08  LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF BUILDING, DEMOLITION AND SIGN PERMITS.
   No permit shall be issued by the Manager of the Inspection Services Division
of the Department of Community Development for the erection of a sign or
construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any structure, work
of art, object or area within an historic district or for any listed property
except in cases coming under the exclusion in this chapter, unless the
application for such permit is approved by the Landmarks Commission through the
issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness in the manner prescribed herein.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1321.09  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (a)   When the owner of a property within a Historic District or the owner
of a listed property desires to make any change in design, color, texture,
material or exterior features, including the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, demolition or the erection of a sign, or any change in
environmental features, such owner or his agent shall file with the Secretary
of the Landmarks Commission an application in such form and with such plans,
specifications and other material as the Landmarks Commission may from time to
time prescribe.
 
   (b)   Within thirty (30) days of such submission, the Landmarks Commission
shall consider such application, plans, specifications and other material for
determination whether the Certificate of Nonapplicability of this chapter or a
Certificate of Appropriateness should be issued.
 
   (c)   If the Landmarks Commission determines that no architectural or
environmental feature is involved, the Secretary of the Landmarks Commission
shall issue a Certificate of Nonapplicability and shall return the application,
plans, specifications and other materials to the applicant.
 
   (d)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission finds that an architectural
feature is involved, the Landmarks Commission shall determine whether the
proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or change of
design, color, texture, or material or exterior feature of such structure, sign
or environmental feature is appropriate.  In making such determination the
Landmarks Commission shall refer to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation, and to the design guidelines adopted by the Landmarks
Commission.
 
   (e)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission finds such proposed
construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or change in design,
color, texture, material or exterior feature of any structure, sign or
environmental feature to be appropriate, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall
be issued by the Secretary of the Landmarks Commission.
 
   (f)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission finds such proposed
construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or change in design,
color, texture, material or exterior feature of any structure, sign or
environmental feature not to be appropriate but failure to issue a Certificate
of Appropriateness will create a substantial hardship to the applicant and that
such certificate may be issued without substantial detriment to the public
welfare and without substantial derogation from the purposes of this chapter,
then and in such event, the Secretary of the Landmarks Commission shall issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness for such proposed work.
 
   (g)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission determines within the
appropriate time that a Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of
Nonapplicability of this chapter shall not be issued, it shall forthwith state
in its records reasons for such determination and may include recommendations
respecting the proposed construction or reconstruction, alteration, demolition
or change in design, texture, color, material or exterior feature of any
structure, sign or environmental feature.  The Secretary of the Landmarks
Commission shall forthwith notify the applicant of such determination and
transmit to him a certified copy of the reasons for denial and recommendations,
if any, of the Landmarks Commission.
 
   (h)   At its discretion, the Landmarks Commission may establish a waiting
period not to exceed six (6) months, during which time no action shall be taken
on the issuance or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate
of Nonapplicability.  During such waiting period, the Landmarks Commission
shall negotiate with the owner of the property in order to develop a compromise
proposal acceptable to both.
(Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
   (i)   An appeal of the decision of the Landmarks Commission may be made to
the City Commission.  Such appeals must be made in writing to the City
Commission within thirty (30) days of the decision by the Landmarks Commission.
(Ord. 85-485.  Passed 9-10-85.)
 
1321.10  AUTOMATIC ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   In the event that the Landmarks Commission fails to make a determination as
to whether a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of
Nonapplicability is required or should issue within the period of time set
forth in Section
1321.09, and if the Landmarks Commission has not formally resolved to institute
a six (6) month waiting period, then the Secretary of the Commission shall
forthwith issue to the applicant a Certificate of Appropriateness.
(Ord. 84-549.  Passed 11-13-84.)
 
1321.11  EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any property or area listed under the provisions of
this chapter, provided such work involves no change in design, color, texture,
material or exterior appearance; nor shall anything in this chapter be
construed to prevent any change, including the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or demolition of any feature which, in the view of the Director of
Community Development or, in the case of commercial buildings, the Inspection
Services Manager, acting lawfully, is required for the public safety because of
an unsafe or dangerous condition.
(Ord. 94-139.  Passed 4-19-94.)
 
   (b)   This chapter shall not apply to structures, works of art, or other
property, real or personal, owned by the United States, the State of Ohio, a
municipality or any instrumentality, agency or political subdivision thereof. 
The Landmarks Commission shall have no jurisdiction whatsoever regarding such
structures, works of art and other property, real and personal, so owned.
(Ord. 87-147.  Passed 3-17-87.)
 
1321.99  PENALTY.
   Violations shall be subject to the penalties provided under Section 1303.99
of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 84-549. Passed 11-13-84.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1322
Inspection of Non-Owner-Occupied Dwelling Units
 
1322.01   Definitions.
1322.03   Purpose.
1322.03   Code Inspections.
 
1322.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Dwelling unit” shall have the same meaning as is set forth in
Codified Ordinance Section
1102.02(d)(23).
   (b)   “Owner” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Codified Ordinance
Section
1323.01(e).
   (c)   “Occupant” shall mean any person other than the owner who has
tenement, lessee, or other contractual rights to the premises.
      (Ord. 03-352.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1322.02  PURPOSE.
   This Chapter is enacted for the general purpose of promoting the public
health, safety, comfort, and welfare of the residents of The City of
Springfield, Ohio, and, specifically, to provide for an inspection program for
non-owner-occupied dwelling units which focuses upon owners of dwelling units
with a demonstrable history of noncompliance with code enforcement notices and
orders, all in an attempt to facilitate the provision of habitable and safe
dwelling units for occupancy by the citizens of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 03-352.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1322.03  CODE INSPECTIONS.
   In addition to existing case-by-case complaint-based inspections of dwelling
units in the City:
   (a)   The nonresident owner of a premises with a dwelling unit shall have
the interior and exterior of the premises, its structures, and its dwelling
units inspected semi-annually, for a minimum of four years, to determine
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code (or other applicable codes),
under the following circumstances:
      (1)   If two or more notices and orders to comply have been issued after
January 1, 2004, to the owner pursuant to Chapter
1305 or Chapter
1324 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield, or any other
applicable code of a substantially similar nature, within any two year period,
concerning the same premises, and have not been complied with within the time
provided in the notices and orders to comply, said premises shall be inspected
as specified above.
      (2)   If the owner has had a premises ordered razed by the City pursuant
to an Adjudication Order, or other substantially similar order of like import,
after January 1, 2004, or has had a property actually razed by the City as a
public nuisance after January 1, 2004, all premises and structures with a
dwelling unit belonging to, but not occupied by, that owner shall be inspected
as specified above.
   (b)   A fee for the inspections, as specified above, shall be due and
collectable from the owner in advance, as detailed below:
      (1)   $125 for a premises with one dwelling unit
      (2)   $175 for a premises with two dwelling units
      (3)   $225 for a premises with three dwelling units
      (4)   $250 for a premises with four dwelling units
      (5)   $265 for the first dwelling unit in a premises with five or more
dwelling units, plus $15 for each additional dwelling unit on the premises.
      (6)   Should one or more re-inspections prove necessary, a fee of $50
will be imposed for each such re-inspection.
         (Ord. 03-352.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1323
Abatement of Nuisances and Demolition of Structures
 
1323.01   Definitions.
1323.02   Nuisance determination; prohibition.
1323.03   Notice and abatement.
1323.04   Posting of notice.
1323.05   Emergency abatement.
1323.06   Right to make immediate repairs.
1323.07   Appeal to Board of Building Appeals.
1323.08   Abatement of nuisance by Community Development Director.
1323.09   Fire damaged structures; insurance proceeds.
1323.10   Notices.
1323.11   Violation citation tags.
1323.12   Removal of graffiti.
1323.13   Required schedule for boarded structures.
1323.14   Noncompliant boarded structures a nuisance.
1323.15   Cooperating owners; special notice and abatement.
1323.16   Expedited procedure for failure to clean up garbage, litter, rubbish,
and refuse; work by City; collection of expenses without lien.
1323.17   Placarding of damaged buildings.
1323.18   Civil penalty for failure to pay.
1323.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCE
Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
Demolition fee - see BLDG.
1313.09
Demolition permits in historic district - see BLDG.
1321.08
 
1323.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Demolition material" means all material, including but not limited
to, rock, stone, concrete, and asphalt which is used in construction, mining,
building maintenance, or road or street maintenance.
   (b)   "Garbage" means all putrescrible matter, including but not limited to
animal or vegetable wastes or feces, whether solid, liquid or mixed, which
attends, exists, or is created or accumulates within the City.
   (c)   "Litter" includes any garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or
fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of
vehicles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature,
or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   "Occupant" means any person being the owner or having tenement, lessee
or other contractual rights to the premises.
   (e)   "Owner" means the owner of record of the premises in fee or any lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of the rents,
receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or other person in control
of the premises or their duly authorized agents including but not limited to
property managers.
   (f)   "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
   (g)   "Rubbish or refuse" means all natural or man made matter, whether
putrescible or nonputrescible, combustible or noncombustible and including but
not limited to ashes, paper, tin, tin cans, bottles, glass, a non-permitted
temporary sign, a temporary sign when its temporary sign permit has expired,
vegetable material, brush, grass, leaves, wrappings, cardboard, trees, shrubs,
crockery, dead animals, furniture or appliances (or parts thereof), industrial
waste, waste of a dangerous or explosive nature, septic tank cleanings,
demolition matter, rubber tires, rubber products, metal, motor vehicle parts or
pieces, engines and motors or parts thereof, any upholstered furniture not
manufactured, designed, and intended for exterior use, or any similar object
which is not clearly intended for outdoor use on the premises.
      (Ord. No. 09-184. Passed 7-7-09.)
    (h)   "Weeds" means all burrs, vines, Russian, Canadian and common
thistles, briers, dock, burdock, wild mustard, jimpson weed, dog fennel,
ragweed, golden rod, sweet clover, wild parsnip, wild carrot and other noxious
vegetation growing wild and uncultivated upon any land within the City, which
may cause noxious exhalations.
   (i)   "Public nuisance" means any yard, land or lot, fence, wall, garage,
shed, house, building, structure, sign, tree, pole, smoke stack, or any
excavation, basement, cellar, well, cistern or sidewalk subspace or part
thereof:
      (1)   having an accumulation of demolition material, garbage, litter,
rubbish or weeds, which accumulation creates a danger to health, life, limb or
property;
      (2)   which will cause hurt, harm, discomfort, damage or injury to the
public or to any considerable number of persons in the City or to members of
the public by reason of any one or more of the following:
         A.   Being detrimental to the general health of the community.
         B.   Being a fire hazard.
         C.   Being unsafe for occupancy, or use.
         D.   Being an attractive nuisance to children.
         E.   Lack of reasonable or adequate maintenance of structures, and
grounds, causing deterioration and blighting influence on nearby properties and
thereby depreciating the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate
vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community.
         F.   Having a condition which violates a provision of any of the
Building Codes, adopted in Chapter
1301 of the Codified Ordinancesof the City of Springfield, Ohio, or violates a
provision of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in Chapter
1305 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield, Ohio.
         G.   Being a bench billboard which has fallen into such a state of
disrepair or has suffered such damage and wear so as to no longer be in
compliance with the City’s Property Maintenance Code or is otherwise dangerous
to use.
         H.   A sign which prohibited under Chapter
1155 of the Zoning Code.
            (Ord. 90-184.  Passed 7-7-09.)
         I.   A stormwater management facility which the City Engineer has
determined to have a maintenance deficiency as described in Chapter
961 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield, Ohio.
      (Ord. 15-87. Passed 3-31-15.)
     (j)   "Public nuisance" shall also mean any yard, land, or lot, or part
thereof, other than a yard or lot zoned or legally used, for any use first
permitted by Codified Ordinance Chapters 1145, 1147, 1149, or
1151, which has placed or stored thereupon any used washer, dryer,
refrigerator, dishwasher, stove, range, oven, freezer, water heater or other
like major appliance, including, but not limited to, any yard, land, or lot or
part thereof, upon which any such major household appliance is placed for
purposes of outdoor sales and/or outdoor display. 
      (Ord. 91-312.  Passed 7-23-91.)
1323.02  NUISANCE DETERMINATION; PROHIBITION.
   (a)   When a reasonable basis to believe that a public nuisance exists, the
Community Development Director shall inspect or cause the inspection of the
premises on which such public nuisance is believed to exist.  The Fire Chief
and the Health Commissioner may and, upon request of the Community Development
Director, shall inspect or cause the inspection of premises on which a public
nuisance is believed to exist. 
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
   (b)   No owner or occupant of a premises shall permit the existence of a
public nuisance to continue on such premises.
 
1323.03  NOTICE AND ABATEMENT.
   (a)   If, upon inspection, it is determined that a public nuisance exists,
then the Community Development Director or Chief of Police shall send or
deliver a written notice to abate such public nuisance to each owner or
occupant, or both, who caused or permitted the public nuisance to exist.  Such
notice shall identify the public nuisance and require the owner or occupant, or
both, to abate the public nuisance within seven (7) days of such notice if the
public nuisance is litter [as the term "litter" is defined in Section
1323.01(c)] and in all other cases within thirty (30) days of such notice
either by the removal of the public nuisance or the repair of the public
nuisance in accordance with Section
1323.06.  Failure to abate the public nuisance within seven (7) or thirty (30)
days of such notice, as provided herein, may cause the City to abate the public
nuisance at the expense of the owner or occupant, or both, who caused or
permitted such public nuisance to exist.
 
   (b)   The Community Development Director shall prepare or cause the
preparation of a written report, including photographs, of every public
nuisance for which a notice to abate is issued.  All such reports shall remain
on file with the Development Director until the public nuisance is abated.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1323.04  POSTING OF NOTICE.
   The Community Development Director or Chief of Police shall place a notice
in or on any structure which qualifies as a "public nuisance" informing the
public that a public nuisance exists and has so been determined by the
Community Development Director or Chief of Police.  The notice is to remain in
or on the structure which qualifies as a public nuisance until it is repaired,
or removed in accordance with the notice given to the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee or agent of the structure which qualifies as a public nuisance, or
other persons having an interest in such public nuisance as shown on the land
records of the Recorder of Clark County, Ohio.  No person shall remove such
notice until the Community Director or Chief of Police determines that the
public nuisance has been removed or repaired.
(Ord. 98-319. Passed 9-22-98.)
 
1323.05  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   (a)   In the event the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement
Manager determines that the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the City will be threatened by the continuance of the condition of the
public nuisance, other than a public nuisance described in subsection (b)
hereof, and determines that the designated public nuisance must be removed
immediately to prevent injury to the life and/or property of the residents of
the City, the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager shall
report such facts to the City Manager, and the City Manager shall cause the
immediate repair, vacation or demolition, or whatever action is necessary to
abate such public nuisance at the expense of the property owner for all accrued
cost.  When an emergency public nuisance has been determined by the aforesaid
officers, the abatement shall be carried out without regard for the
requirements of Sections
1323.02,
1323.03,
1323.04, and
1323.07 through
1323.11, except that the City Manager shall, to the extent reasonably
permitted, by the exigency of the circumstances, give the owners of the subject
premises, written or personal notice of his intended action and an opportunity
for hearing thereon.
 
   (b)   A public nuisance requiring emergency abatement exists when the Chief
Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager finds a vacant structure
which has been open to entry at doors, windows, or other points accessible to
the general public for more than forty-eight (48) hours.  The Chief Building
Official or the Code Enforcement Manager shall report such facts to the City
Manager, and the City Manager shall cause such public nuisance to be
immediately abated pursuant to this subsection at the expense of the property
owner for all accrued costs.  The Manager of Inspection Services shall be
authorized at any time to enter on the premises and the owner shall permit him
to enter the structure in order to investigate and abate the severity of the
public nuisance.  In securing such structure, the Chief Building Official or
the Code Enforcement Manager may call on any department, division, or bureau of
the City for whatever assistance may be necessary, or may, by private contract,
board and secure such structure. Upon making a determination that a structure
is open to entry at doors, windows, or other points accessible to the general
public, the Chief Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager shall cause
notice of such condition and of the City's intent to board and secure the
structure to be posted on the structure at least forty eight (48) hours prior
to boarding and securing the structure.  When an emergency public nuisance has
been determined by the aforesaid officers, the abatement shall be carried out
without regard for the requirements of Sections
1323.02,
1323.03,
1323.04, and
1323.07 through
1323.11, except that the City Manager shall, to the extent reasonably
permitted, by the exigency of the circumstances, give the owners of the subject
premises, written or personal notice of his intended action and an opportunity
for hearing thereon.
(Ord. 04-147.  Passed 5-4-04.)
 
   (c)   Municipal water service shall be shut off at all structures boarded
and secured per (b) above, to prevent damage to meters, wastage, and potential
damage to private property.  Except as otherwise provided in this section,
municipal water service will remain shut off until the Code Enforcement Manager
confirms to the Service Department and to the Utility Billing Division of the
Finance Department that the structure meets the minimum standards of the
Property Maintenance Code, such confirmation not to be unreasonably withheld. 
No person may reside in any such structure while municipal water services are
shut off.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, City-owned boarding
may only be removed from a structure when the structure meets the minimum
standards of the Property Maintenance Code.  Municipal water service may be
restored to a structure if the owner of the structure has paid in full all past
due City utility charges pertaining to the property on which the structure is
located and has entered into an Expedited Repair Agreement with the City
wherein the owner agrees to bring the structure into compliance with the
Property Maintenance Code on or before a date certain.  Each Expedited Repair
Agreement entered into with the City shall contain a description of repairs to
be made to the subject structure, a covenant that all repairs will be made in a
workmanlike manner and a liquidated damages provision establishing damages of
$500 for the structure owner's failure to complete repairs described in the
Expedited Repair Agreement by the date certain established therein.  The City
Manager may require structure owners to deposit with the City sufficient
security to ensure the payment of liquidated damages under an Expedited Repair
Agreement. 
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
   (d)   The owner of a structure which has been boarded and secured per (b)
above shall immediately arrange for electric service to be shut off at such
structure to prevent potential fire threats to the structure and adjacent
property.  No person shall instruct an electric utility company to restore
electric service to a structure which has been boarded per (b) above, without
first acquiring an electric reconnect permit from the Department of Community
Development and providing that structure is equipped with, at minimum, a three-
wire, 120/240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less
than 100 amperes. 
(Ord.02-273.  Passed 7-9-02.)
 
1323.06  RIGHT TO MAKE IMMEDIATE REPAIRS.
   Upon being served notice, the owner or owners may make application in
writing or in person to the Community Development Director for a special
building permit to undertake the repairs or replacement of items found to
constitute a public nuisance.  Plans and specifications as required by the
Community Development Director covering the repairs or replacements shall be
furnished by such owner or owners to the Community Development Director within
fifteen days after receipt of notice or such additional time as the Community
Development Director may deem necessary to  complete  plans  and 
specifications,  not  to  exceed  ninety  (90)  days.    The Community
Development Director shall, upon approval of such plans and specifications,
issue a special building permit to the owner or owners, such permit to be for a
period of thirty (30) days.  Within such thirty (30) days the owner or owners
will effect and complete such repairs and/or replacements, or the Community 
Development Director may grant a renewal of the special building permit if the
owner or owners show reason or cause for the requested extension and which
extension will more readily effect such repairs and/or replacements.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1323.07  APPEAL TO BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any owner of a building,
wall, structure or premises shall have the right to appeal from any
determination of the Community Development Director and to appear before the
Board of Building Appeals of the City at a time and place to be determined by
the Board of Building Appeals.
 
   (b)   Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board
of Building Appeals in writing within ten (10) days after receipt of any notice
given under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1323.08  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Should such nuisance not be abated at the expiration time stated in
such notice or expiration of the time stated in the special building or
demolition permit issued by the Community Development Director, the Community
Development Director shall be authorized, at any time thereafter, to enter upon
such premises and the owner shall permit the Director entry to abate the
nuisance by demolition and removal of any structure or by taking any other such
action as may be required.
 
   (b)   In abating such nuisance the Community Development Director may call
upon any department of the City for whatever assistance may be necessary, or
may, by private contract, obtain the abatement thereof.
 
   (c)   In abating a nuisance, whether under the emergency procedure of
Section
1323.05(a), under the regular procedure set forth in this chapter, or any other
authority, the cost of the abatement action may be recovered by any method
authorized by law, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The owner or owners may be billed directly for the cost of the
abatement.
      (2)   The City may cause the cost of the abatement to be levied as an
assessment and recovered in accordance with law.
      (3)   The City may offset the costs to be levied against any income tax
refund or other payment that may be due or become due to the owner.
 
   (d)   The cost of the abatement shall include an administrative service
charge of $400 per structure on all abatement cases in which the City engages
in the demolition of one or more structures, and in all other nuisance
abatement cases the cost of the abatement shall include an administrative
service charge of $100. The administrative service charges shall be in addition
to all other abatement costs incurred by the City in determining the total cost
of abatement.
(Ord. 07-21, passed 1-30-07; Ord. 15-233, passed 9-1-15.)
 
1323.09  FIRE DAMAGED STRUCTURES; INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
   (a)   The City Commission hereby authorizes and directs adherence to the
procedure described in divisions (C) and (D) of Ohio R.C. 3929.86.
 
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby designated the officer to carry out
the duties of Ohio R.C. 3929.86.
(Ord. 84-115. Passed 3-20-84.)
 
1323.10  NOTICES.
   Whenever the Community Development Director determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, except where a violation citation
tag has been issued pursuant to Section
1323.11, he, or the Chief of Police, may give notice of such violation to the
person responsible therefor and order compliance with this chapter as
hereinafter provided.  Such notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, refer to the section or sections of this
chapter violated and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the procedure for appeal,
except emergency orders issued pursuant to Section
1323.05;
   (e)   Be served on the owner or occupant in person.  However, this notice
and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or occupant if a
copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the dwelling affected.  If a registered or certified mail
envelope is returned with an endorsement showing that service was refused, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address,
residence, or place of business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on the date of
mailing.  If the registered or certified mail envelope is returned with an
endorsement showing that service was unclaimed, the notice may be served by
ordinary mail to his last known mailing address, residence or place of
business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing, provided that the
ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an
endorsement showing failure of delivery.
      (1)   The notice and order may, in the alternative, be served by leaving
it at his last known residence or place of business in the presence of a family
member or other responsible person of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the general nature of the contents thereof.
      (2)   If service is not accomplished by any of the above means, then a
notification of the existence of the notice and order may be published at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation.
         (Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1323.11  VIOLATION CITATION TAGS.
   The Community Development Director is authorized and directed to provide
inspectors with citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due
notice and summons to the person responsible for violations of this chapter.
   (a)   Such citation tag shall be put in writing on an appropriate form,
describe the offense charged, refer to the section of the chapter violated,
order the defendant to appear at a stated time and place, and it shall be made
on oath before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
   (b)   The citation tag shall be served on such person in accordance with the
provisions of Section
1323.10.
   (c)   The citation tag shall inform the defendant that, in lieu of appearing
at the time and place stated, he may, within that stated time, appear
personally at the office of the Clerk of Municipal Court and on signing a plea
of guilty and a waiver of trial pay a stated fine and stated costs, if any. 
The citation shall inform the defendant that he may be arrested if he fails to
appear either at the Clerk's office or at the time and place stated in the
citation.
   (d)   When the defendant fails to appear within the stated time, a warrant
may be issued for the arrest of that person.
   (e)   When a defendant appears, but does not sign a guilty plea and waiver
of trial, the court shall proceed in accordance with Rule 5 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   The citation tag as herein provided, shall be sufficient notice,
summons, and legal service thereof for the purpose specified thereon, provided
that the use of such tags shall not prohibit the issuance of either additional
citation tags or a legal notice of violation as provided by Section
1323.10 in the event such violation is continued or repeated.
      (Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1323.12  REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   (a)   The exterior of all privately-owned structures and premises shall be
free from graffiti when such graffiti is visible from a right-of-way, or may
otherwise be seen by the public.  Owners on whose property graffiti is
displayed shall completely remove the graffiti or shall completely and
uniformly cover the graffiti with appropriate wall finish.
 
   (b)   Whenever the Director of the Department of Community Development finds
a structure or portion thereof to be in violation of subparagraph (a) hereof,
said Director of Community Development or Chief of Police shall prepare a
written notice of violation describing the location of the graffiti to be
removed or covered.  Such notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises to which it relates.  Such notice of violation shall
require the owner to remove or cover the graffiti in accordance with
subparagraph (a) hereof or appeal to the Board of Building Appeals in
accordance with subparagraph (c) within seventy-two (72) hours of the posting
of the notice.  Such posting shall be deemed legal service of such notice.
(Ord. 97-184.  Passed 5-13-97.)
 
   (c)   The owner shall have a right to appeal the notice and decision of the
Director of Community Development or Chief of Police and appear before the
Board of Building Appeals at a specified time and place to show cause why said
owner should not comply with such notice.
(Ord. 97-184.  Passed 5-13-97.)
 
   (d)   If the owner fails to remove or cover the graffiti or appeal to the
order of the Director of Community Development or Chief of Police within
seventy-two (72) hours of the posting of the notice, the Director of Community
Development or Chief of Police shall cause the graffiti to be abated and any
expenses or costs incurred under this section shall be paid by the owner of the
dwelling structure or premises.  If the owner fails to pay the cost within
thirty (30) days after the receipt from the Director of Community Development
of a statement of the charges and costs incurred therein, then the Director of
Community Development may cause the amount to be levied as an assessment and
recovered in accordance with Ohio Revised Code Section 715.216. 
Notwithstanding the method of collection set forth herein, the Director of Law
may take any action necessary to collect the cost of graffiti abatement from
the owner or other responsible party or parties.
(Ord. 97-184.  Passed 5-13-97.)
 
   (e)   For purposes of this section, "graffiti" means any unauthorized
inscription, word, figure or design which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn,
applied, or painted on any structural component or wall or other surface of any
building, structure, or other facility regardless of the nature of the material
of the structural component.  Such inscription, word, figure, or design shall
be deemed unauthorized if the property owner has not granted written permission
prior to its application to the structure.
 
   (f)   The Director of Community Development may provide inspectors with
citation tags which may be used for the purpose of giving due notice and
summons to the person responsible for violations of subparagraph (a) of this
section, in accordance with Section
1323.11 hereof.
(Ord. 94-91.  Passed 3-15-94.)
 
1323.13  REQUIRED SCHEDULE FOR BOARDED STRUCTURES.
   (a)  The owner of a structure known to have been boarded up for ninety days
shall receive from the Community Development Department a Notice to Elect
Whether to Rehabilitate, Sell, or Demolish the Structure.  Within ninety days
after the aforesaid Notice to Elect is sent to the owner, the owner of the
structure (hereafter termed "owner") shall prepare a proposal to sell,
demolish, or rehabilitate said structure including a timetable for completing
said proposal.  The Director of Community Development (hereafter termed
"Director") shall examine the owner's proposal and timetable to see if it is a
reasonable response to the condition of the structure.  Provided there is a
timely start and adequate progress, a timetable of as long as fifteen months
can be approved by the
Director.
 
   (b)  If the Director determines that the proposed timetable to sell,
demolish, or rehabilitate the structure is reasonable, and the proposed work
program will result in bringing the structure into compliance with law, then
the owners proposal shall be approved by the Director, and further City
enforcement shall be withheld as long as the property remains secure, and the
timetable and work program are fulfilled.
 
   (c)  If  the Director determines that the timetable is unreasonable, or that
the proposed work program will not bring the structure into compliance with
law, the Director shall disapprove the proposal, state the reasons therefor in
writing, and continue enforcement action to require the repair or demolition of
the structure.
 
   (d)  Sale.  If the approved proposal calls for sale of the property, then
the property shall be continuously listed on the Multiple Listing Service at a
price deemed reasonable by the Director, considering the conditions of the
structure and the value of the underlying property.  The listing must commence
within 30 days of the approval of the proposal.
 
   (e)  Demolition.  If the approved proposal calls for demolition of the
property, then the necessary approvals (historical or other) must be sought in
a timely manner, all necessary submissions being completed within 30 days of
the approval of the proposal.  Once all needed approvals have been received,
the structure's demolition must begin within 30 days and be continuously
pursued.
 
   (f)  Rehabilitation.  If the approved proposal calls for the rehabilitation
and repair of the structure, then all trash, debris, and other contents
impeding the necessary examinations by contractors and inspectors, shall be
removed within 30 days of the approval of the proposal.  Thereafter the
approved timetable and work program shall be fulfilled on schedule, or the
Director shall commence an action to force repair or demolition.  The approved
rehabilitation program shall be subject to the same requirements for building
permits, zoning approvals, and such other regulatory approvals as apply to
other structures within the City.
(Ord. 97-272.  Passed 7-22-97.)
 
1323.14  NONCOMPLIANT BOARDED STRUCTURES A NUISANCE.
   It is hereby found that structures which have been boarded up for more than
ninety days, have been the subject of a Notice to Elect pursuant to Section
1323.13 for longer than ninety days, yet still have no approved proposal, are
in fact public nuisances.  This finding reflects the blighting influence of
such structures, their tendency to become attractive nuisances, their tendency
to harbor rats and vermin, and the accelerated decay common to such
structures.  Therefore, while noncompliant owners are subject to the penalties
referenced in Section
1323.99, the structures themselves are to be the subject of appropriate
proceedings to mandate the abatement of the public nuisance.
(Ord. 97-272.  Passed 7-22-97.)
 
1323.15  COOPERATING OWNERS; SPECIAL NOTICE AND ABATEMENT.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
1323.03, for owners who maintain on file with the City's Department of
Community Development in a form approved by the Community Development Director
a current, up-to-date list comprised of all the names of their tenants of
single-family dwelling units, the address of each tenant's dwelling unit, and
such tenant's mailing address; when, upon inspection, it is determined that a
public nuisance exists in the form of litter, rubbish, or refuse [as defined in
Section
1323.01(c) and (g)] at a single-family dwelling unit, then the Community
Development Director or Chief of Police shall send or deliver a written notice
to abate such public nuisance to each owner and to the tenant who caused or
permitted the public nuisance to exist.  Such notice served on the tenant shall
identify the public nuisance and require the tenant to abate the public
nuisance within seven (7) days of such notice and such notice served on the
owner shall identify the public nuisance and require the owner to abate the
public nuisance within fourteen (14) days of such notice either by the removal
of the public nuisance or the repair of the public nuisance in accordance with
Section
1323.06.  Failure to abate the public nuisance within fourteen (14) days of
such notice being served on both the owner and tenant, as provided herein, may
cause the City to abate the public nuisance at the expense of the owner or
tenant, or both, who caused or permitted such public nuisance to exist.
(Ord. 00-337.  Passed 10-3-00.)
 
1323.16  EXPEDITED PROCEDURE FOR FAILURE TO CLEAN UP GARBAGE, LITTER, RUBBISH
AND REFUSE; WORK BY CITY; COLLECTION OF EXPENSES WITHOUT LIEN.
   (a)   The owner, occupant or person having the charge or management of any
lot or parcel of land situated within the City, whether the same be improved or
unimproved, vacant or occupied, shall properly dispose any and all garbage,
litter, rubbish and refuse located on such lot or parcel of land in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter
1323.  Upon being notified in writing by the Community Development Director to
do so, such owner, occupant or person in charge or having the management of any
such lot or parcel of land shall properly dispose any and all garbage, litter,
rubbish and refuse located on such lot or parcel of land in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter
1323 within five days of the date of service of such notice.  Such notice shall
conform to the provisions of subdivision (b) of this Section
1323.16.
 
   (b)   The notice specified in subdivision (a) of this Section
1323.16 shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, refer to the section or sections of
this chapter violated and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time of five (5) days or more for performance;
      (4)   Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person.  However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant
or agent if a copy thereof is sent by ordinary mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the land affected.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on the date of
mailing.
 
   (c)   If the owner, occupant or agent having the charge or management of any
lot or parcel of land situated within the City fails to comply with the notice
provided for in subdivision (a) of this Section
1323.16 within five days from the time of service thereof, the Community
Development Director shall cause such garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse
located on such lot or parcel of land to be removed and disposed of.  He shall,
with the assistance of the Director of Law, cause the cost of such removal and
disposal to be collected through such legal processes as are available to the
City for the collection of such debts.  All expenses so incurred, including
charges for all services and service of notice, the use of machinery,
equipment, landfill fees and labor necessary for removal of such garbage,
litter, rubbish and refuse from such lot or parcel of land and disposed of, may
be charged to such owner, occupant or agent having the charge or management of
any lot or parcel of land on which the City caused such garbage, litter,
rubbish and refuse to be removed and disposed of and upon whom the notice
specified in subdivision (a) of this Section
1323.16 was served in accordance with subdivision (b) of this Section
1323.16.
 
1323.17  PLACARDING OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS.
   (a)   In the event an emergency, as that term is defined in Section
1102.02(e)(8) of the Codified Ordinances, is declared as the result of
circumstances producing structural damage to buildings in the City, the City
Manager shall form a damage assessment team or teams to evaluate buildings and
post a placard on such damaged buildings as determined by their condition:
 
“Checked OK For Habitation”  This placard (Green) shall be placed on a 
building or structure to identify a building with some damage to its structure
and suspected damage to contents and that the building is usable without
repairs.
“Needs Repairs Before Habitation”  This placard (Orange) shall be placed on a
building which is damaged and may be used under limited conditions, and may be
restored to service with repairs.
“Condemned as Dangerous & Unsafe”  This placard (Red) shall be placed on a
building which is totally uninhabitable and beyond repair.
 
   (b)   Once a placard is placed on a building pursuant to the City Manager’s
order, no person shall remove, alter or cover such placard or permit such
placard to be removed, altered or covered until the placard is removed pursuant
to a subsequent order of the City Manager.
(Ord. 03-235.  Passed 7-1-03.)
 
1323.18  CIVIL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   In the event any person fails to pay a sum, required to be paid to the City
under this Chapter (hereinafter the “principal sum”), within ninety (90) days
after the sum becomes due and owing to the City, a civil penalty is imposed on
such person equal to thirty-three and thirty-three one-hundredths percent
(33.33 %) of the sum of the following two items:
   (a)   The unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter,
   (b)   Court costs incurred in obtaining a judgment against such person for
the unpaid principal sum due and owing to the City under this Chapter.
      (Ord. 07-22.  Passed 1-30-07.)
 
1323.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any owner or occupant of premises who fails to abate the existence of
a public nuisance as required by Section
1323.02 et seq. is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, a violation
of any such provision is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 96-136.  Passed 4-19-96.)
 
   (b)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of Subsection
1323.16(b) of this chapter shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250) or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, or both.
(Ord. 03-235.  Passed 7-1-03.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1324
CODE COMPLIANCE AND HEARINGS
 
NOTE: This Chapter
1324 was enacted by Ord. 18-24 passed 2-27-18.  The existing Chapter
1324 was repealed. 
 
1324.01   Civil offense.
1324.02   Class A civil offenses.
1324.03   Class B civil offenses.
1324.04   Class C civil offenses.
1324.05   Notice of civil offense and civil fine; procedures.
1324.06   Answer to notice of civil offense.
1324.07   Hearings.
1324.08   Correction of violation.
1324.09   Default.
1324.10   Request to set aside default and delinquency charges.
1324.11   Civil proceedings.
1324.12   Freedom from improper Influence.
1324.13   Ex parte communications prohibited.
1324.14   Administrative regulations.
1324.99   Civil fines.
1324.999   Savings.
 
1324.01  CIVIL OFFENSE.
   "Civil Offense" means an offense against the City of Springfield set forth
in the Codified Ordinance of The City of Springfield, Ohio, made subject to a
civil fine by this chapter.  Charging a person with a civil offense is an
alternative to criminal prosecution.    A person charged with civil offense may
not be arrested for the commission of the civil offense.
 
   If a person is charged with a criminal offense for the same conduct for
which that person was charged with a civil offense, the civil offense process
shall be promptly suspended or the charge dismissed without prejudice.
 
1324.02  CLASS A CIVIL OFFENSES.
   A person who violates a standard of conduct set forth in a section or
chapter of the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, listed
below is liable for the civil fine specified in Section
1324.99 for a Class A Civil Offense.
   (a)   Section
1327.03   Contractor License Requirement.
   (b)   Section
1327.04   Subcontractor Registration Requirement.
   (c)   Chapter
771      Garage Sales.
   (d)   Chapter
909      Weeds.
   (e)   Section
541.07   Defacing Public Property.
   (f)   Section
916.02(a)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
   (g)   Section
916.02(c)(4)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
   (h)   Section
521.08(a)   Dumping/discharge onto Public Property.
   (i)   Section
521.08(b)   Dumping/discharge into Waterways.
   (j)   Section
1711.09(d)   Grease Traps.
   (k)   Section
1380.06   Vacant Property Registration Notice to City of Foreclosure, Filing,
Fee.
   (l)   Section
776      Food Trucks.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, within the preceding
twelve months the civil fine shall be doubled, and the fine is not subject to
reduction for correction of the violation.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, on two or more
previous occasions within the preceding twelve months that person may be
charged as a recalcitrant offender. A person found to be a recalcitrant
offender is liable for an additional recalcitrant offender civil fine as
specified in Section
1324.99, for each third and subsequent violation occurring within a period of
twelve consecutive months. The recalcitrant offender fine shall be in addition
to any civil fine imposed under this chapter.  Such additional recalcitrant
offender civil fine is not subject to reduction for correction of the
violation.
(Ord. 19-127. Passed 5-7-19; Ord. 19-260.  Passed 10-8-19; Ord. 20-29.  Passed
2-11-20.)
 
1324.03  CLASS B CIVIL OFFENSES.
   A person who violates a standard of conduct set forth in a provision of the
Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, listed in either division
(a) or (b) below is liable for the civil fine specified in Section
1324.99 for a Class B Civil Offense.  If the provision is listed under
paragraph (a) below, the otherwise applicable civil fine shall be reduced by 75
percent if the person charged shows in accordance with Section
1324.08 that the violation has been corrected, unless the person has violated
the same provision of the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio
within the previous year. 
   (a)   Class B Civil Offenses With Civil Fines Subject to 75 Percent
Reduction for Correction of Violation:
      (1)   Section
1323.02   Prohibition of Public Nuisance.
      (2)   Chapter
1321      Historic Landmarks Commission.
      (3)   Chapter
901      Improvements and Excavations.
      (4)   Chapter
903      Sidewalks, Curbs, and Gutters.
      (5)   Chapter
741      Peddlers.
      (6)   
Part 11      Zoning Code.
      (7)   Chapter
521      Health, Safety, and Sanitation.
      (8)   Section
961.05   Comprehensive Stormwater Management – Prohibitions.
      (9)   Section
961.07(d)   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Required.
      (10)   Section
961.14   Comprehensive Stormwater Management – Violations.
 
   (b)   Class B Civil Offenses with Civil Fines Not Subject to 75 Percent
Reduction for Correction of Violation:
      (1)   Chapter
1311      Permits.
      (2)   Section 916.02(d)(2)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (3)   Section 916.02(d)(3)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (4)   Section 916.02(e)(1)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (5)   Section 916.02(e)(2)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (6)   Section 1380.05   Vacant Property Registration Required and
Penalty.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, within the preceding
twelve months, the fine will be doubled and the fine is not subject to
reduction for correction of the violation.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, on two or more
previous occasions within the preceding twelve months that person may be
charged as a recalcitrant offender. A person found to be a recalcitrant
offender is liable for an additional recalcitrant offender civil fine as
specified in Section
1324.99, for each third and subsequent violation occurring within a period of
twelve consecutive months. The recalcitrant offender fine shall be in addition
to any civil fine imposed under this chapter.  Such additional recalcitrant
offender civil fine is not subject to reduction for correction of the
violation. (Ord. 19-260.  Passed 10-8-19.)
 
1324.04  CLASS C CIVIL OFFENSES.
   A person who violates a standard of conduct set forth in a provision of the
Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, listed in either division
(a) or (b) below is liable for the civil fine specified in Section
1324.99 for a Class C Civil Offense.  If the provision is listed under
paragraph (a) below, the otherwise applicable civil fine is reduced by 75
percent if the person charged shows in accordance with Section
1324.08 that the violation has been corrected, unless the person has violated
the same provision of the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio
within the previous year. 
   (a)   Class C Civil Offenses With Civil Fines Subject to 75 Percent
Reduction for Correction of Violation:
      (1)   Chapter
1305      Property Maintenance Code
   (b)   Class C Civil Offenses With Civil Fines Not Subject to 75 Percent
Reduction for Correction of Violation:
      (1)   Chapter
739      Salvage Yard Operators
      (2)    Section
1323.13   Required Schedule For Boarded Structures
      (3)    Chapter
1322      Inspection of Non-Owner-Occupied Dwelling Units
      (4)   Section 916.02(d)(1)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (5)   Section 916.02(e)(5)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (6)   Section 916.02(e)(6)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (7)   Section 916.02(e)(8)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (8)   Section 916.02(u)   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (9)   Section 916.03   Dumping/discharge into Public Sewer System.
      (10)   Section
1503.14(c)   Failing to abate a violation cited by the Fire Official.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, within the preceding
twelve months the fine shall be doubled and the fine is not subject to
reduction for correction of the violation.
 
   If a person has previously been found to have violated the same provision of
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, on two or more
previous occasions within the preceding twelve months that person may be
charged as a recalcitrant offender. A person found to be a recalcitrant
offender is liable for an additional recalcitrant offender civil fine as
specified in Section
1324.99, for each third and subsequent violation occurring within a period of
twelve consecutive months. The recalcitrant offender fine shall be in addition
to any civil fine imposed under this chapter.  Such additional recalcitrant
offender civil fine is not subject to reduction for correction of the
violation.
 
1324.05  NOTICE OF CIVIL OFFENSE AND CIVIL FINE; PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A city officer or employee charged with enforcement of the Codified
Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, may issue a notice of civil
offense and civil fine to a person that the city officer or employee reasonably
believes has committed a civil offense.
 
   (b)   A notice of civil offense and civil fine shall:
      (1)   Identify the person being charged if known to the issuing officer
or employee;
      (2)   Indicate the offense charged, the civil fine for the offense, and
the date, time, and location of the offense charged;
      (3)   State the address to which answers and requests for hearing are to
be delivered;
      (4)   Be signed, dated and attested by the issuing officer or employee;
      (5)   Advise the person being charged that:
         a.   An answer to the charge made in the notice must be filed within
15 calendar days of the date of when the notice was mailed or otherwise served;
         b.   The failure to file an answer within 15 calendar days will be
considered as an admission to the charge stated in the notice;
         c.   A hearing will be held if requested;
         d.   Failure to appear at a requested hearing will be considered an
admission of the civil offense;
         e.   All available collection remedies and costs of collection will be
pursued in the event the civil fine and other charges are not timely paid; and
         f.   The civil fine otherwise due may be reduced if the notice is for
an offense that is subject to reduction if the offense is corrected within 7
calendar days.
   (c)    The notice of civil offense shall be served upon the person charged
by one or more of the following means:
      (1)   By personal delivery to the person charged;
      (2)   By delivery to an adult at the address of the person charged;
      (3)   By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous location on the
real property where the violation occurred if the real property is owned,
occupied, or controlled by the person charged;
      (4)   If the offense relates to a motor vehicle, by posting a copy of the
notice on that motor vehicle;
      (5)   By mail addressed to the person charged at an address shown on a
public record identifying the person being charged as the owner, occupant or
person in control of the real estate, motor vehicle or other property to which
the offense relates.  If mail service is attempted via mail with a “certificate
of mailing” or via certified or registered mail and the mail is not returned by
the postal service within 15 calendar days of mailing, the delivery of the
notice shall be presumed.
 
1324.06  ANSWER TO NOTICE OF CIVIL OFFENSE.
   (a)   A person served with a notice of a civil offense may respond to the
charge by filing an answer.  An answer must be made filed within 15 calendar
days of the mailing or other service of the notice.  The answer may:
      (1)   Admit that the person committed the offense by payment of the civil
fine specified in the notice;
      (2)   Admit the facts set forth in the notice and offer an explanation of
the circumstances;
      (3)   Admit that the person committed the offense and, for those offenses
that provide for a reduction in civil fine on proof of correction, offer proof
that the person has corrected the offense;
      (4)   Deny that the person committed the offense and request a hearing. 
If the person desires that the enforcement officer, inspector or other
authorized individual who issued the notice attend the hearing, the person must
request same in the answer; or
      (5)   If the person served has taken an administrative appeal authorized
by the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, from an order on
which the offense was based, the person may request that the time for answering
the notice of civil offense be continued until the appeal has been finally
resolved. 
 
   (b)   (1)   A person who admits the commission of the offense for which a
notice was issued must pay the civil fine arising out of the offense to the
City Treasurer.
      (2)   A person who admits the facts set forth in a notice of civil
offense with an explanation may offer an explanation of the circumstances to
the hearing examiner.
      (3)   A person who admits the commission of the offense with an offer of 
    proof of correction, may offer proof that the person has corrected the
offense.
 
   (c)   If a person admits the commission of the civil offense or fails to
file an answer within 15 calendar of the mailing or other service of the notice
and fails to pay the fine within 15 calendar days of the mailing or other
service of the notice, the fine is “delinquent” and the delinquent amount shown
in Section
1324.99 is then due.
 
   (d)     The filing of an answer to a notice of a civil offense does not
extend the time for the filing of any appeal to the Board of Building Appeals
or similar appellate body.
 
1324.07  HEARINGS.
   (a)   A hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing on all civil
violations whenever the person charged requests a hearing in a timely manner. 
The City shall notify the person charged of the date and time of the hearing.
The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days after the filing of the
request, unless the delay is necessary in the interest of justice.  The hearing
may be informal, but all testimony shall be under oath. A copy of the notice of
violation is a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the City of
Springfield, Ohio, and is prima-facie evidence of the facts it contains.
 
   (b)   The hearing examiner shall enter into the record of the proceedings
the notice of civil offense and civil fine, the filing of or failure to file an
answer, the substance of the answer, and testimony and evidence produced at the
hearing, and other relevant information.
 
   (c)   The hearing examiner shall issue a decision and make findings of fact
from the record and conclusions of law in support of the decision within ten
days from the close of the hearing.  The findings and conclusions shall
demonstrate that the decision is consistent with applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations.  The decision shall state a finding of liability or non-
liability, the civil fine due, payments, delinquency and collection charges and
any other relevant information.
 
   (d)   If the person served has taken an administrative appeal authorized by
the Codified Ordinances of The City of Springfield, Ohio, from an order on
which the offense was based, the hearing examiner may extend the time for
answering the notice of civil offense until the appeal has been finally
resolved.
 
   (e)   If the hearing officer has made a finding of liability, the civil fine
due must be paid within ten days of the issuance of the hearing officer’s
decision.  If not paid within that time period, or such other period
established by the hearing officer in the decision, the fine is “delinquent”
and the delinquent amount shown in Section
1324.99 is then due.
 
1324.08  CORRECTION OF VIOLATION.
      (a)   A person charged with a violation of the Codified Ordinances of The
City of Springfield, Ohio, and served with a notice of civil offense and civil
fine specified as subject to reduction for correction of the violation may
offer proof of correction to the hearing examiner.  The offer of proof of
correction may be submitted in person or, to avoid the necessity of personal
appearance, may be submitted as affidavits or other documentary evidence, by
mail.  A person charged who chooses to submit proof of correction by mail and
chooses not to attend the hearing is authorizing the hearing examiner to
determine whether the correction has or has not been timely made based on the
mailed submission and evidence the City may present at the hearing.
 
   (b)   For those offenses that provide for a reduction in civil fine on proof
of correction, on being satisfied that the offense has been corrected, the
examiner shall reduce the otherwise applicable civil fine by 75 percent.  If
the civil fine is eliminated or reduced and the person previously paid the
civil fine, the amount paid in excess of the revised civil fine shall be
returned to the person; if the civil fine is reduced and the person has not
previously paid the civil fine, the person must pay only the amount of the
civil fine as reduced.  An unpaid civil fine is due and must be paid within ten
days after the determination of the examiner, or the fine is deemed delinquent.
 
1324.09  DEFAULT.
   If a person who has been served with a notice of civil offense and civil
fine fails to answer within the time provided by Section
1324.06, or fails to attend a requested hearing, the person is in default, and
the civil fine as specified by Section
1324.99 for the class of the offense charged is due.
 
1324.10  REQUEST TO SET ASIDE DEFAULT.
   A person subject to a civil fine entered after default may request to have
the default set aside.  A hearing examiner may set aside a default on a showing
that the person had no actual knowledge of the notice of civil offense and
civil fine or that the default should be excused in the interest of justice.
 
1324.11  CIVIL PROCEEDINGS.
   The Law Director is authorized to institute civil proceedings in the name of
the City, and may include claims for injunction, mandatory relief, restraining
orders, damages, the appointment of a receiver, and such other relief as may be
allowed in law or equity.  Institution of civil proceedings does not exclude
criminal proceedings as may be authorized by the Codified Ordinances of The
City of Springfield, Ohio, nor do such civil proceedings preclude charging a
person with a civil offense as authorized by this chapter.
1324.12  FREEDOM FROM IMPROPER INFLUENCE.
   (a)   No member of the City Commission, member of the City administration,
party to any proceedings before a hearing examiner, or any other person shall
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, or improperly influence or attempt
to improperly influence a hearing examiner in the performance of the duties of
office.
 
   (b)   An examiner may not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision
in which the examiner of any of the following persons has a direct or
substantial financial interest:  a spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, or
in-law of the examiner, or business firm or organization in which the examiner
has a substantial interest.  The examiner shall promptly report to the City
Manager any attempt at interference or improper influence or any actual or
potential conflict prior to such hearing.
1324.13  EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS PROHIBITED.
   A person may not communicate with a hearing examiner to influence a decision
in a matter pending before an examiner other than at a public hearing or in a
writing that is made a part of the record of the proceeding.  This provision
shall not prohibit communication between an examiner and any member of the
administration assigned to assist or give legal counsel to the examiner in the
pending proceeding.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
 
1324.14  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager may adopt administrative regulations for the conduct of
hearings and for the enforcement of the Codified Ordinances of The City of
Springfield, Ohio, through the issuance of notices of civil offenses that are
not in conflict with any ordinance enacted by the City Commission.
 
1324.99  CIVIL FINES.
   The civil fines for civil offenses are:
 
 
Offense                    Initial Civil Fine If Delinquent
Class A                    $50.00          $ 100.00
Class B                    $100.00            $200.00
Class C                    $200.00            $400.00
Recalcitrant Offender Fine $500.00            $1,000.00
 
   Neither the City of Springfield, Ohio, the federal government, the State of
Ohio, nor any city, federal, or state agency or political subdivision is liable
for a civil fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.
 
1324.999  SAVINGS.
   This chapter does not affect any act done or committed in violation of any
former ordinance relating to the same subject, or any suit or proceeding now
pending in court for the violation of the provisions of any former ordinance,
or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under such ordinance, but
all proceedings or prosecutions now pending shall be conducted to final
determination irrespective of this chapter.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1325
Moving of Buildings
 
1325.01   Definitions.
1325.02   Permit required.
1325.03   Application.
1325.04   Deposit for expense to City.
1325.05   Insurance policy.
1325.06   Duties of Chief Building Official.
1325.07   Duties of permittee.
1325.08   Enforcement.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license house movers - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
Moving buildings fee - see BLDG.
1313.13
 
1325.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in
the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number
include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   (a)   "Building" means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter
or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property, and used for residential
business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly,
educational or recreational purposes.
   (b)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (c)   "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
   (d)   "Chief Building Official" means the director of the Inspection
Services Division and/or his authorized assistants.
      (Ord. 80-18.  Passed 1-15-80.)
 
1325.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street
or alley in the City without first obtaining a permit from the Chief Building
Official.
(Ord. 80-18.  Passed 1-15-80.)
 
1325.03  APPLICATION.
   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application
for such permit with the Chief Building Official.
   (a)   Form.  The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided
by the Chief Building Official, and shall be filed in the office of the Chief
Building Official.
   (b)   Contents.  The application shall set forth:
      (1)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of
exterior and interior;
      (2)   A legal description and address of the lot to which it is proposed
such building be moved;
      (3)   The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved;
      (4)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved;
      (5)   Proposed moving date and hours;
      (6)   Any additional information which the Chief Building Official finds
necessary to a determination of whether a permit should be issued.
   (c)   Accompanying Papers.
      (1)   Certificate of ownership or entitlement.  The applicant, if other
than the owner, shall file with the application, an affidavit signed by the
owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building.
         (Ord. 80-18.  Passed 1-15-80.)
      (2)   Fee.  The application shall be accompanied by an inspection fee in
the amount prescribed by Chapter
1313.
         (Ord. 88-467.  Passed 8-2-88.)
 
1325.04  DEPOSIT FOR EXPENSE TO CITY.
   Upon receipt of an application it shall be the duty of the Chief Building
Official to procure from the Service Department an estimate of the expense that
will be incurred in removing and replacing any electric wires, street lamps or
pole lines belonging to the City or any other property of the City, the removal
and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the
building through the City.  Prior to issuance of the permit, the Chief Building
Official shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to
the amount of the estimated expense.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00.)
 
1325.05  INSURANCE POLICY.
   Any person filing an application hereunder shall file with the Chief
Building Official a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Ohio, and approved as to form by the
Director of Law, in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars/three hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000/$300,000) personal injury and twenty-five thousand
dollars/fifty thousand dollars ($25,000/$50,000) property damage and providing
for the indemnity for any damage which the City may sustain by reason of damage
or injury to any highway, street or  alley,  sidewalk,  fire  hydrant  or 
other  property  of  the  City,  which  may be caused by or be incidental to
the removal of any building over, along or across any street or alley in the
City and to indemnify the City against any claim of damages to persons or
private property, and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out
of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across
any street or alley in the City.
(Ord. 80-18.  Passed 1-15-80.)
 
1325.06  DUTIES OF CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   Inspection.  The Chief Building Official shall inspect the building
and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance
of a permit are met.
 
   (b)   Standards for Issuance.  The Chief Building Official shall refuse to
issue a permit if he finds:
      (1)   That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement
has not been complied with.
      (2)   That the building is too large to move without endangering persons
or property in the City.
      (3)   That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair
or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without
endangering persons and property in the City.
      (4)   That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose
for which moved, if the removal location is in the City.
      (5)   That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and
property would be endangered by its use.
      (6)   That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building
in its new location.
      (7)   That for any other reason persons or property in the City would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
 
   (c)   Fees and Deposits.
      (1)   The Chief Building Official shall deposit all fees and deposits and
all bonds or insurance policies with the Director of Finance.
      (2)   Upon his refusal to issue a permit, the Chief Building Official
shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. 
Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned.
      (3)   After the building has been removed the Chief Building Official
shall furnish the City Manager with a written statement of all expenses
incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the City, and of
all material used in the making of the removal and replacement together with a
statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the
City.  However, if any wires, poles, lamps or other property are not located in
conformity with governing ordinances, the permittee shall not be liable for the
cost of removing the same.  The City Manager shall authorize the Chief Building
Official to return to the applicant all deposits after the City Treasurer
deducts the sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all
damage done to property of the City by reason of the removal of the building. 
Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned.
 
   (d)   Designate Streets for Removal.  The Chief Building Official shall
procure from the Service Department a list of designated streets over which the
building may be moved.  The Chief Building Official shall have the list
approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in
writing.  In making their determinations, the Service Director or designee and
the Chief of Police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property
in the City and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
1325.07  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   Every permittee under this chapter shall:
   (a)   Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the
written permit.
   (b)   Notify the Chief Building Official in writing of a desired change in
moving date and hours as proposed in the application.
   (c)   Notify the Chief Building Official in writing of any and all damage
done to property belonging to the City within twenty-four (24) hours after the
damage or injury has occurred.
   (d)   Cause red lights to be displayed during the night time on every side
of the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the
public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades
across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or
injury by reason of the removal of the building.
   (e)   Remove the building from the City streets after one (1) day of such
occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the City Manager.
   (f)   Comply with this Code, the fire limits, the Zoning Code and all other
applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the City.
   (g)   Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing
grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and
sanitary condition.
   (h)   See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, the water
shut off and the meter returned to the City water office.  The permittee shall
notify the gas and electric service companies to remove their services.
      (Ord. 80-18.  Passed 1-15-80.)
 
1325.08  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official, the Police Division and the Service
Director or designee shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this
chapter.
   (b)   The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs above
the deposit.
   (c)   The City shall proceed to do the work necessary to leaving the
original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, where the permittee does
not comply with the requirements of this chapter and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the general deposit.
(Ord. 00-456.  Passed 12-19-00; Ord. 19-289. Passed 12-10-19.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1327
Building Contractors
 
1327.01   Purpose.
1327.02   Definitions.
1327.03   General contractor license required.
1327.04   Specialty contractor registration required.
1327.05   Exemptions.
1327.06   Procedure and requirements for general contractor licensing.
1327.07   Procedure and requirements for specialty contractor registration.
1327.08   Prospective application.
1327.09   Revocation of general license and specialty contractor registration.
1327.99   Penalty.
 
1327.01  PURPOSE.
   Within its scope, the purpose of licensing of general contractors and
registration of specialty contractors is to provide for the establishment of
the responsibility of persons performing work by contract, whether written or
oral, and whether pursuant to a permit issued to any building contractor or the
person for whom he is performing the work, and to provide for standards to
safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare.
(Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
 
1327.02  DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have and include
the meanings respectively ascribed thereto:
   (a)   "Authorized agent" means any person authorized by another to act for
him.
   (b)   "Building" means any structure, edifice, erection or construction
built over and upon any lands, within the City by means of any art, trade or
craft, whether built or intended for use for habitation, business, commercial
or other purposes.
   (c)   “Building contractor” means any general contractor, general
subcontractor or any specialty contractor.
   (d)   "City" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (e)   "Contract" means any legally binding agreement, written or oral,
entered into between a contractor and owner, lessee, or owner and lessee.
   (f)   "General contractor" means:
   (1)   Any person engaged in the business of, or who undertakes for another
person, whether as a prime contractor or as a subcontractor, whether by oral or
written agreement, all or a portion of any work as herein described, and who is
or may be contractually obliged to supervise all or any portion of any such
work for another, and shall also include every person who is engaged in the
business of, or who enters into undertakings incidental to demolition,
excavation, moving or construction contracting.
      (2)   Any person who performs work or obtains the performance of work, as
hereinafter defined, with the intention of thereafter selling the building or
structure upon which such work is performed.
      (3)   The term “general contractor’ does not include a specialty
contractor licensed under chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (g)   "Owner" means the person vested with the ownership, dominion or title
of property.
   (h)   "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation or any combination
thereof.  The masculine gender, when used herein, shall include the feminine
and neuter genders, and the singular shall include the plural.
   (i)   “Specialty contractor” means a person holding a valid licensed issued
under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (j)   "Supervise" means to have control of the work performed by contract,
written or oral, or by reason of a lease, to insure that all work performed is
not in violation of this Code, any rules, statute or ordinance of the City.
   (k)   "Work" means the erection, construction, repair, improvement, moving,
removal, altering or remodeling of any building or structure or any part
thereof.
      (Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.03  GENERAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Except as is otherwise provided by this chapter, no person within the City
on or after the effective date of this section shall:
   (a)   Act or hold himself out to be or undertake or perform any work as a
general contractor, without first having obtained an appropriate license in the
manner specified in this chapter.  However, in the event such person shall be a
firm or corporation, it may act as or represent itself as such, if such work is
under the actual and immediate supervision of a duly and appropriately licensed
member, partner, officer or employee;
   (b)   Permit or cause any work as hereinbefore defined to be undertaken or
performed other than by a duly licensed or registered building contractor on
contract from the owner, lessee or owner and lessee.
      (Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.04  SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Except as is otherwise provided by this chapter, no person within the City
on or after the effective date of this section shall act or hold himself out to
be or undertake or perform any work as a specialty contractor as hereinbefore
described without first registering with the Chief Building Official in the
manner specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.05  EXEMPTIONS.
   Within the scope of this chapter, the following do not require licensing or
registration:
   (a)   Any person performing plumbing work or any activity connected
therewith.
   (b)   The owner of residential property who performs the work himself,
unless such owner is acting as a general contractor within the meaning of
Section
1327.02(f)(2).
   (c)   The sale of any construction material, products, fixtures or articles
when no work is performed by the seller on the premises where material,
products or articles are to be installed.
   (d)   Work done or caused to be done by the United States of America, or the
State of Ohio.
   (e)   An actual and regular hourly employee for a business enterprise who
undertakes, performs, prosecutes or supervises any maintenance and repair work
for, or on behalf of, his employer on his employer's property.
   (f)   Work consisting of maintenance, repair or improvements to a one (1),
two (2) or three (3) family dwelling or performed for the owner thereof, when
the person performing work for the owner performs the work as an employee of
the owner.
   (g)   Work consisting of the painting, wallpapering or sandblasting of a
building or structure or any part thereof; or the repair, replacement or
installation of carpet, tile or sheet goods; or the replacement, installation
and/or glazing of glass; or the inspection and treatment of a building or
structure for insect or pest infestation; or the repair, replacement or
installation of drain spouting; or the repair, replacement or erection of a
television tower or antenna; or work required for ordinary repair and
maintenance of a building or structure; or property maintenance work including
but not limited to weed-cutting and debris removal.
      (Ord. 09-184. Passed 7-7-09.)
   (h)   Persons licensed as plumbing contractors under Chapter 4740 of the
Ohio Revised Code and not licensed under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code
as a heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor or a refrigeration
contractor, or an electrical contractor or a hydronics contractor are regulated
under Chapter
1367 of the Codified Ordinances as to their operations as plumbing contractors
and are exempt from the registration requirements under Sections
1327.04 and
1327.07 of this Chapter only as to their operations as plumbing contractors.
   (i)   The original construction of a single one-, two-, or three-family
dwelling structure during a period of 12 consecutive months:
      (1)   when the one-, two-, or three-family dwelling structure being
constructed and the lot upon which it is situated is owned by the individual or
individuals claiming this exemption and
      (2)   when the person performing work for the owner performs the work as
an employee of the owner or as an uncompensated volunteer.
   (j)   The original construction of a single accessory building to a one-,
two-, or three-family dwelling structure during a period of 12 consecutive
months:
      (1)   when the one-, two-, or three-family dwelling structure is owned by
the individual or individuals claiming this exemption and
      (2)   when the person performing work for the owner performs the work as
an employee of the owner or as an uncompensated volunteer.
         (Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.06  PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR GENERAL CONTRACTOR LICENSING.
   The requirements and procedures for general contractor licensing shall be as
follows:
   (a)   Any individual desiring a general contractor license of any type as
herein defined shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall make written
application therefor with the Chief Building Official.  Every application shall
be on forms prescribed by the Chief Building Official; shall furnish all
information and data required thereby.  No application shall be required of any
person desiring to renew a general contractor license previously issued or
renewed provided that the information and data contained in such person's
application therefor is correct or, if not, is corrected by or at the direction
of such person and that all other provisions of this action are complied with.
   (b)   No general contractor license shall be issued or continue in effect
pursuant thereto unless the applicant shall give evidence that the following
items are valid and remain in effect during the duration of the general
contractor license.
   (1)   The payment of a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fee upon application
for a general contractor license; and the payment of a two hundred dollars
($200.00) fee for each renewal thereof.  Payment shall be made to the City
Treasurer.
   (2)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including completed
operations, with a minimum limit of liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage liability.  General contractors performing demolition work shall provide
collapse hazard coverage ("c" exclusion deleted) and shall also provide
explosion hazard coverage ("x" exclusion deleted) if explosive materials are to
be used.  General contractors performing excavation work shall provide both
collapse and underground hazard coverage ("c" and "u" exclusions deleted).
   (3)   Proof of Workers' Compensation coverage, if coverage is required by
the State of Ohio.
   (4)   City income tax number.
   (5)   The execution by such applicant for such license of a bond in the sum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) with sureties thereon to the approval of the
City Manager.  Such bond shall be conditioned to save the City and its
inhabitants harmless from all loss or damage of whatsoever nature that may
result from any violation by the general contractor licensee and/or his
authorized agents of any law, ordinance or rule governing work contemplated by
the terms of such license which are then in force or thereafter established by
proper authority.
   (c)   The Chief Building Official shall issue a general contractor license
to any person who has complied with the provisions of this section.  However,
it shall not be mandatory upon the Chief Building Official to issue any such
general contractor license should it be established to his satisfaction that
the applicant in question has been guilty of acts, things or practices for
which a general contractor license could be revoked, as hereinafter set forth. 
Every general contractor license issued or renewed pursuant to this section
shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the same has been issued or
last renewed unless otherwise renewed prior thereto in accordance with the
provisions of this section.  No fee required under the provisions of this
section after payment thereof to the City shall be refunded for any cause
whatsoever.
   (d)   Every license issued pursuant to this Section shall expire on December
31 of the year in which the license was issued or renewed.  General contractor
licensees may apply to renew their general contractor licenses during the
period November 15 through December 31 of the year in which the general
contractor license was issued or previously renewed by making application for
renewal and paying the renewal fee two hundred dollars ($200.00).  Holders of
the general contractor license may request an extension of the general
contractor license expiration date by filing with the Chief Building Official a
request for an extension citing the reason an extension should be granted and
by paying an extension request fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  For good
cause shown, the Chief Building Official may grant an extension of the general
contractor license expiration date (either prospective or retroactive) of up to
thirty days.  General contractor licenses which are permitted to expire may not
be renewed and a holder of an expired general contractor license who wishes to
become licensed must apply for a new general contractor license pursuant to the
provisions of this Section and pay the application fee of three hundred dollars
($300.00).
   (e)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, no general contractor license
shall be issued unless the Director of Community Development is able to find
that the applicant is a person of good character.  Upon receipt of an
application, the Chief Building Official shall request that the Police Division
perform a criminal records investigation to determine whether the applicant has
a record of criminal convictions and the results of the investigation shall be
provided to the Director of Community Development.  The Chief Building Official
may perform such other investigations as he may deem appropriate to obtain
information bearing on the character of an applicant and shall provide such
information obtained to the Director of Community Development.  The applicant
shall have the burden of proving to the Director of Community Development that
the applicant is a person of good character.
      (Ord. 05-262.  Passed 10-18-05.)
   
1327.07  PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   The requirements and procedures for specialty contractor registration shall
be as follows:
   (a)   Any person desiring a specialty contractor registration shall make
written application therefor with the Chief Building Official.  Every
application shall be on forms prescribed by the Chief Building Official; shall
furnish all information and data required thereby.  No application shall be
required of any person desiring to renew a specialty contractor registration
previously issued or renewed provided that the information and data contained
in such person's application therefor is correct or, if not, is corrected by or
at the direction of such person and that all other provisions of this action
are complied with.
   (b)   No specialty contractor registration shall be issued or continue in
effect pursuant thereto unless the applicant shall give evidence that the
following items are valid and remain in effect during the duration of the
subcontractor registration.
   (1)   The payment of a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fee upon application
for a specialty contractor registration; and the payment of a two hundred
dollar ($200.00) fee for each renewal thereof.  Payment shall be made to the
City Treasurer.
   (2)   Proof that the applicant holds a valid and unexpired license issued
pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (3)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including completed
operations, with a minimum limit of liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage liability.  Subcontractors performing demolition work shall provide
collapse hazard coverage ("c" exclusion deleted) and shall also provide
explosion hazard coverage ("x" exclusion deleted) if explosive materials are to
be used.  Subcontractors performing excavation work shall provide both collapse
and underground hazard coverage ("c" and "u" exclusions deleted).
   (4)   Proof of Workers' Compensation coverage, if coverage is required by
the State of Ohio.
   (5)   City income tax number.
   (6)   The execution by such applicant for such license of a bond in the sum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) with sureties thereon to the approval of the
City Manager.  Such bond shall be conditioned to save the City and its
inhabitants harmless from all loss or damage of whatsoever nature that may
result from any violation by the specialty contractor and/or his authorized
agents of any law, ordinance or rule governing work contemplated by the terms
of such specialty contractor registration which are then in force or thereafter
established by proper authority.
   (c)   The Chief Building Official shall issue a certificate of specialty
contractor registration to any person who has complied with the provisions of
this section.  Every certificate of specialty contractor registration issued or
renewed pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year for
which the same has been issued or last renewed unless otherwise renewed prior
thereto in accordance with the provisions of this section.  No fee required
under the provisions of this section after payment thereof to the City shall be
refunded for any cause whatsoever.
   (d)   Every certificate of specialty contractor registration issued pursuant
to this Section shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the
certificate of specialty contractor registration was issued or renewed. 
Holders of a certificate of specialty contractor registration may apply to
renew their certificate of specialty contractor registration during the period
November 15 through December 31 of the year in which the certificate of
specialty contractor registration was issued or previously renewed by making
application for renewal and paying the renewal fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00).  Holders of the contractor registration may request an extension of
the registration expiration date by filing with the Chief Building Official a
request for an extension citing the reason an extension should be granted and
by paying an extension request fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  For good
cause shown, the Chief Building Official may grant an extension of the
contractor registration expiration date (either prospective or retroactive) of
up to thirty days.  A certificate of specialty contractor registration which is
permitted to expire may not be renewed and a holder of an expired certificate
of specialty contractor registration who wishes to become registered must apply
for a new certificate of specialty contractor registration pursuant to the
provisions of this Section and pay the application fee of three hundred dollars
($300.00).
      (Ord. 05-262.  Passed 10-18-05.)
1327.08  PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, any
contractors license issued to a general contractor pursuant to this chapter on
or before September 17, 2001, shall remain in full force and effect as a
general contractor license during the term thereof, any subcontractors
registration issued pursuant to this chapter to a general subcontractor on or
before September 17, 2001 shall remain in full force and effect as a general
subcontractor registration during the term thereof and any contractors license
issued pursuant to this chapter or before September 17, 2001, to a specialty
contractor shall remain in full force and effect as a specialty contractor
registration during the term thereof.
(Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.09  REVOCATION OF GENERAL LICENSE AND SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The Director of Community Development is authorized and empowered to
revoke, modify, or suspend a general contractor license pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter for any of the following acts or omissions of the
holder of any such general contractor license:  fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation of any facts in obtaining a general contractor license;
obtaining a contract for work authorized under any such license by fraud,
deceit, or misrepresentation of facts; negligence or incompetence in the
practice of contracting or the performance of any work; willful or fraudulent
material departure from the plans or specifications prescribed for any work
undertaken by a general contractor licensee; violation of or disregard for any
provision of law or ordinance or rule or regulation; non-compliance resulting
in injury or damage to any person or to the public; or giving false information
on an application for a permit; or being listed as a non-compliant person
ineligible to receive building permits by the Clark County Department of
Building Regulations.
(Ord. 04-133.  Passed 4-20-04.)
   (b)   The Director of Community Development is authorized and empowered to
revoke a specialty contractor registration pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for any of the following reasons:
   (1)   The specialty contractor no longer holds a valid and unexpired license
issued pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code, or
   (2)   The specialty contractor no longer has in effect the insurance
described in Subsection
1327.09(b)(3), or
   (3)   The specialty contractor no longer has in effect the workers
compensation coverage described in Subsection
1327.09(b)(4), or
   (4)   The specialty contractor no longer has in effect the bond described in
Subsection
1327.09(b)(6), or any combination of the foregoing items (1) through (4).
   (c)   No such general contractor license or  specialty contractor
registration shall be revoked without at least fifteen (15) days advance
written notice by the Director of Community Development to the general
contractor licensee or specialty contractor to such effect and without
affording to such general contractor licensee or specialty contractor the
opportunity to appeal to the Board of Building Appeals by submitting the appeal
in writing and stating the reason for the appeal.  Appeals must be filed with
the Secretary of the Board of Building Appeals within ten (10) days after
receipt of notice of revocation.
(Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
1327.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates Section
1327.03 or Section
1327.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be fined not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisoned not more than six (6)
months, or both.
(Ord. 01-237.  Passed 6-26-01.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1329
Flood Plain Regulations
 
1329.01   Definitions.
1329.02   Purpose.
1329.03   Flood plain boundaries and their interpretation.
1329.04   Boundaries of Intermediate Regional Flood Plain.
1329.05   Structures (temporary or permanent).
1329.06   Prerequisites for building permit.
1329.07   Fill material.
1329.08   Depth of fill.
1329.09   Utilities.
1329.10   Water and waste disposal.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Construction permits and prohibitions for dams, dikes or levees - see Ohio R.C.
1521.06
Marking flood areas - see Ohio R.C. 1521.14
 
1329.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "Flood" means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland waters.
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
      (3)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are caused by accumulations of
water on or under the ground.
      (4)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in subsection (a)(1) hereof.
 
   (b)   "Intermediate Regional or 100-Year Flood" means a flood having a one
percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year.
 
   (c)   "Intermediate Regional Flood Plain" means the area of dry land which
would be inundated by the flood waters of the 100-Year Flood.  Such area is
designated as the shaded course of Buck Creek as shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood Hazard Boundary Maps for the City of Springfield. 
Copies of such maps are available in the offices of the Community Development
Department of the City.
 
   (d)   "Chief Engineer" means the Engineer for the City of Springfield.
(Ord. 94-368.  Passed 10-11-94.)
 
1329.02  PURPOSE.
   The Flood Plain is established to protect the areas in the City in the
Intermediate Regional Flood Plain that are subject to predictable flooding
during Intermediate Regional Floods.  Controlled uses of these areas is
necessary to protect human life, prevent or minimize material and economic
losses and reduce the cost to the public aid and relief efforts occasioned by
the unwise occupancy of such flood areas.
 
1329.03  FLOOD PLAIN BOUNDARIES AND THEIR INTERPRETATION.
   The regulations contained in this chapter shall be applicable to all lands
located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Springfield, and within
the Intermediate Regional Flood Plain.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.04  BOUNDARIES OF INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL FLOOD PLAIN.
   The boundaries of the Intermediate Regional Flood Plain shall be determined
by scaling distances on the applicable map.  Where interpretation is needed as
to exact location of boundaries, the Chief Engineer shall make the necessary
interpretation.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.05  STRUCTURES (TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT).
   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures,
including basement and cellars, located within the Intermediate Regional Flood
Plain must be elevated to one (1) foot above the maximum height of the 100-year
flood.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures including basements and cellars located within the Intermediate
Regional Flood Plain shall be elevated or floodproofed watertight to one (1)
foot above the maximum heights of the 100-year flood.  Where such height is to
be achieved by the use of fill, such fill shall be approved by the Chief
Engineer and shall extend fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of the intended
structure.  Such structures shall be designed and/or anchored to prevent the
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure during the 100-year
flood.  When such floodproofing techniques are used the builder shall submit
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods are sufficient to preclude any damage to the structure
arising from flood depths, pressures, velocities, the impact of uplift forces
and other factors associated with the 100-year flood.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.06  PREREQUISITES FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   In addition to all other prerequisites for the issuance of a building permit
pursuant to this chapter, no building permit for construction pertaining to a
structure which is subject to this chapter shall be issued without the
applicant having first submitted the mean sea level elevation of the first
floor and all floors below the first floor, including basement, as determined
by a surveyor registered in the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.07  FILL MATERIAL.
   Fill material shall be clean and free of any organic materials which could
pollute or contribute to the pollution of ground water.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.08  DEPTH OF FILL.
   No structure which is subject to Sections
1329.01 through
1329.08 of this chapter shall be constructed on land which has fill material to
a depth of five (5) feet or more, which fill material was deposited within the
preceding ten (10) years prior to the application for a building permit, unless
such construction is supervised by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Ohio who certifies that such fill materials will not subside or
otherwise contribute to structural failure.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.09  UTILITIES.
   All utility equipment or installations subject to damage from floods which
is to be located in the Flood Plain shall be installed above the elevation of
the 100-year frequency flood, or shall be waterproofed.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
1329.10  WATER AND WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   Any new or replacement water supply system and sanitary sewage systems
within the Intermediate Regional Flood Plain shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
system into flood waters.  Flap valves shall be installed on all sewer
connections to prevent backflow into buildings during flood conditions.
 
   (b)   No on-site sewage disposal system shall be approved which is located
within the Regional Flood Plain and which can be infiltrated, rendered
inoperable or be contaminated by flood waters.
(Ord. 82-315.  Passed 7-6-82.)
 
 
 
TITLE FIVE--Plumbing Regulations
Chap.
1361.  Administration; Ohio Plumbing Code Adoption.
Chap.
1363.  Definitions.
Chap.
1367.  Licensing Plumbers.
Chap.
1369.  Plumbing Permits and Fees.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1361
Administration; Ohio Plumbing Code Adoption
 
1361.01   Short Title.
1361.02   Ohio Plumbing Code adoption.
1361.03   Duties of Plumbing Inspector.
1361.04   Right of entry.
1361.05   Dangerous and unsanitary conditions.
1361.06   Sanitary facilities required.
1361.07   Plumbing systems.
1361.08   Conflict; more restrictive provision to control.
1361.09   Sewage disposal system which can be infiltrated, rendered inoperable
or be contaminated by flood waters.
1361.10   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage 
systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters.
1361.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings--see Ohio R.C. 715.26(A),
715.29
Power to enforce State Building Code relating to sanitary construction--see
Ohio R.C. 3781.03
Plumbing Inspections Division--see ADM.
137.03
Licensing sewer tappers--see S.U. & P.S.
915.05
Separate sewer connections required--see S.U. & P.S.
915.09
Use of Public Sewers--see S.U. & P.S. 916.02,
925.02
Plumbing in food establishments - see HLTH.
1711.09
 
1361.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This
Title Five of Part Thirteen - Building Code consisting of Chapters
1361 through
1369, shall be known as the Springfield Plumbing Code and may be cited as this
Plumbing Code.
1361.02  OHIO PLUMBING CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)    Adoption.  The Ohio Plumbing Code, 2007 Edition (cited as “OPC”),
being the "2006 International Plumbing Code, Chapters 2 to 13, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., along with editorial changes adopted by
the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Division of Industrial Compliance, Ohio
Department of Commerce effectiveJuly 1, 2007, is hereby adopted by The City of
Springfield, Ohio.
(Ord. 08-81.  Passed 3-25-08.)
 
   (b)     For purposes of enforcing this Plumbing Code, the Health
Commissioner of the Clark County Combined Health District is hereby appointed
to be the Building Official.
(Ord. 05-47.  Passed 2-15-05.)
 
   (c)     Plastic Pipe Exception:  Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Plumbing Code, copper tubing only shall  be used in all water distribution and
water supply applications connecting the City’s water main, the curb stop and
the meter box serving a property.
(Ord. 05-47.  Passed 2-15-05.)
 
1361.03  DUTIES OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall maintain public office hours necessary to
efficiently administer the provisions of this Plumbing Code and amendments
thereto, and shall perform the following duties:
   (a)   Keep a record of all work submitted to him for inspection, together
with his action thereon.
   (b)   Keep a record of the plumbing in each building in the City erected
after October 27, 1952.
   (c)   Inspect all plumbing work authorized by a permit to assure compliance
with this Plumbing Code or amendments thereto, approving or condemning work in
whole or in part as conditions require.
   (d)   Issue a certificate of approval for any work approved by him.
   (e)   Condemn and reject all work done, or being done, or materials used, or
being used, which do not in all respects comply with the provisions of this
Plumbing Code and amendments thereto.
   (f)   Order changes in workmanship or materials essential to obtain
compliance with all provisions of this Plumbing Code.
   (g)   Investigate unsanitary conditions in any building or premises,
resulting from defective plumbing or lack of plumbing therein, which makes it a
menace to health and to issue orders for the abatement of such conditions.
 
1361.04  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Plumbing Code, or whenever the Plumbing Inspector has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises,
any condition which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, the
Plumbing Inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
Plumbing Inspector by this Plumbing Code; provided that if such building,
structure or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials
and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Plumbing Inspector shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
 
1361.05  DANGEROUS AND UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
   (a)     Whenever it is brought to the attention of the Commissioner of
Health that any dangerous or unsanitary condition exists, or that any
construction or work regulated by this Plumbing Code is dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or a menace to life, health or property, or is in violation of this
Plumbing Code, the Health Commissioner may request an investigation by the
Plumbing Inspector, who upon determining such information to be true, shall
order any person, firm or corporation using or maintaining any such condition,
or responsible for the use or maintenance thereof, to discontinue the use of or
maintenance thereof, or to repair, alter, change, remove or demolish the same
as he may consider necessary for the proper protection of life, health or
property.  In a case where there is danger of pollution of the water supply,
the Health Commissioner may order the water service shut off until such
plumbing is made safe to life and health.  In cases where any business
establishment is closed by the Health Commissioner because of conditions
detrimental to public health, such business shall remain closed until
permission to reopen such place of business has been granted by the Health
Commissioner.
 
   (b)     In cases where any building is condemned by the Health Commissioner
and ordered vacated because of being dangerous to life and health, such
building shall remain vacant until permission to reopen such building has been
granted by the Health Commissioner.
 
   (c)     Every order pursuant to this section shall be in writing, addressed
to the owner, agent or person responsible for the premises in which such
conditions exist and shall specify the date or time when such order shall be
complied with, which time shall allow a reasonable period in which the order
can be complied with by the person, firm or corporation receiving such order,
but shall never exceed the maximum period for which such construction can be
safely used or maintained in the judgment of the Health Commissioner.  Refusal,
failure or neglect to comply with such notice or order shall be considered a
violation of this Plumbing Code.
 
   (d)     It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector and of the Health
Commissioner to enforce the provisions of this Plumbing Code, but nothing
herein contained shall be construed to exempt any other officer or department
from the obligation imposed upon them of enforcing the provisions hereof.
 
1361.06  SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (a)   All buildings erected in the City and intended for human habitation or
occupancy shall be provided with operable sanitary plumbing facilities.  At the
least, each new and existing housing unit intended for human habitation shall
be provided with an operable separate water closet and sink for each family. 
New or remodeled nonresidential structures shall be provided with separate
water closets and lavatories for male and female employees as required by this
Plumbing Code.
 
   (b)     Privy vaults and chemically treated dry pan toilets shall not be
constructed, installed or used on any premises within the City of Springfield,
Ohio.
 
1361.07  PLUMBING SYSTEMS.
   All plumbing systems including repairs and additions hereafter installed in
the City shall conform with the provisions of this Plumbing Code.
 
1361.08  CONFLICT; MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISION TO CONTROL.
   In any specific case where there is a difference in the materials, methods
of construction or other requirements specified in different sections of this
Plumbing Code, or any other applicable law or ordinance, or any rule or
regulation of any administrative officer or board having jurisdiction, the more
restrictive shall govern.
 
1361.09  SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS WHICH CAN BE INFILTRATED, RENDERED INOPERABLE
OR BE CONTAMINATED BY FLOOD WATERS.
   No on-site sewage disposal system shall be approved which is located within
the Regional Flood Plain and which can be infiltrated, rendered inoperable or
be contaminated by flood waters.
1361.10  NEW OR REPLACEMENT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS AND/OR SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEMS
TO BE DESIGNED TO MINIMIZE OR ELIMINATE INFILTRATION OF FLOOD WATERS.
   All new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems
located within the Regional Flood Plain shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into the flood waters.
 
1361.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this Plumbing Code or any notice or order
issued pursuant thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(Ord. 91-258.  Passed 6-18-91.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1363
Definitions
 
1363.01   State definitions applicable.
1363.02   Approved.
1363.03   Building.
1363.04   Erected.
1363.05   Person.
1363.06   Regional Flood Plain.
 
1363.01  STATE DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE.
   The definitions contained in Section 4101:2-57-01 of the Ohio Plumbing Code
shall apply to the interpretation of this Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 95-372.  Passed 11-21-95.)
 
1363.02  APPROVED.
   "Approved" means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification
stated or cited in this Plumbing Code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed
use under procedures and powers of administration delegated in this Plumbing
Code.
 
1363.03  BUILDING.
   "Building" means an enclosed structure having exterior or party walls and a
roof designed for the shelter of persons, animals, or property.
 
1363.04  ERECTED.
   "Erected" means altered or changed, as well as any new installation.
 
1363.05  PERSON.
   "Person" means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and includes a firm, partnership, or corporation and its or their
successors or assigns.  The singular includes the plural, and the masculine
includes the feminine.
 
1363.06  REGIONAL FLOOD PLAIN.
   The area of dry land which would be inundated by the flood waters of the
100-year flood.  Such area is described in the currently effective FEMA map
adopted by the City.
(Ord. 91-258.  Passed 6-18-91.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1367
Licensing Plumbers
 
(NOTE:  Chapter
1367 was repealed by Ordinance 02-27, January 22, 2002, and reinstated by
Ordinance 02-194, April 30, 2002.)
 
1367.01   Definitions.   
1367.02   Prohibition.
1367.03   Plumbers Examining Board.
1367.04   Inspector as Secretary.
1367.05   Powers of the Board.
1367.06   Application for license.
1367.07   Violations of licensing.
1367.08   Revocation of license and apprentice registration.
1367.09   Journeyman and apprentice plumber fees.
1367.10   Journeyman Plumber license.
1367.11   Master plumber's license.   
1367.12   Journeyman Plumber's license fee.
1367.13   Apprentice plumbers.
1367.14   Failure to renew license.
1367.15   Applications filed with Health Commissioner.
1367.16   Partnership or corporation.
1367.17   Display of license number.
1367.18   Advertising as plumber without license.
1367.19   Unlawful practice.
1367.20   Employing unlicensed plumbers.
1367.21   Record of licenses.
1367.22   Exceptions.
1367.23   Installation of certain appliances; exceptions.
1367.24   Limited appliance license; examination; bond.
1367.25   Permit and inspection.
1367.26   Procedure and requirements for plumbing contractor registration.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license plumbers - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
Licensing sewer tappers - see S.U. & P.S.
915.05
Licensing of building contractors - see BLDG. Ch.
1327
Permits to clean septic tanks - see BLDG.
1369.12
 
1367.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings given herein.
   (a)   "Apprentice plumber" means a person who is registered as such, and who
is undergoing an apprenticeship or course of training, not exceeding five
years, for the purpose of learning the trade of plumbing.  An "apprentice
plumber" shall perform no work regulated by this chapter, except as an
assistant, under the direct supervision of a master plumber, and in the
immediate presence of a licensed master plumber or a licensed journeyman
plumber.  There may be one apprentice plumber employed to each three journeyman
plumbers or fraction thereof employed by a master plumber.  The term
“apprentice plumber” does not include a person licensed under Chapter 4740 of
the Ohio Revised Code when performing work requiring a license issued under
Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revise Code.
   (b)   "Journeyman plumber" means a person who supervises, installs, alters
or repairs plumbing systems or part thereof, as an employee but does not
furnish material or supplies, and who is registered and the legal possessor of
a journeyman plumber's license, as provided for in this chapter.  The term
“journeyman plumber” does not include a person licensed under Chapter 4740 of
the Ohio Revised Code when performing work requiring a license issued under
Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revise Code.
   (c)   "Master plumber" means a person duly qualified to engage in the
installation of plumbing and in planning, engineering, superintending,
maintenance, and repair with respect to plumbing in all of its branches.  An
active master plumber is a master plumber holding a valid active master
plumber's license and who is authorized to engage in the installation of
plumbing, through contract or otherwise, and also in planning, engineering,
superintending, installation, maintenance, and repair with respect to plumbing
in all of its branches, and as such is authorized to employ journeymen plumbers
and plumbers' apprentices and other persons necessary for the proper
installation of plumbing work in accordance with this Plumbing Code.  An
inactive master plumber is a master plumber holding a valid inactive master
plumber's license, who has chosen not to maintain insurance and a bond in
accordance with Section
1367.11 of this Plumbing Code and who enjoys the privileges and
responsibilities as set forth in Section
1367.11(e) of this Plumbing Code.  The term “master plumber” does not include a
person licensed under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code when performing
work requiring a license issued under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revise Code.
   (d)   “Plumbing contractor” means any individual or business entity who
satisfies all of the following:
      (1)   For compensation, directs, supervises, or has responsibility for
the means, method, and manner of plumbing construction, improvement,
renovation, repair, or maintenance on a construction project and who offers,
identifies, advertises, or otherwise holds out or represents that the
individual or business entity is permitted or qualified to direct, supervise,
or have responsibility for the means, method, and manner of plumbing
construction, improvement, renovation, repair, or maintenance on a construction
project;
      (2)   Is a tradesperson or employs tradespersons who perform and who are
trained to perform plumbing construction, improvement, renovation, repair, or
maintenance on a construction project.
      (3)   Holds a valid and unexpired license issued under Chapter 4740 of
the Ohio Revised Code authorizing operation as a plumbing contractor.
   (e)   “Tradesperson” means an individual who, for compensation, engages in
construction, improvement, renovation, repair, or maintenance of buildings or
structures without assuming responsibility for the means, method, or manner of
that construction, improvement, renovation, repair, or maintenance.
1367.02  PROHIBITION.
   No person shall engage in the business of plumbing or do work at the trade
of plumbing in the City until he has first obtained a valid license or
registration therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
1367.03  PLUMBERS EXAMINING BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby established within the City a Plumbers Examining Board
which shall consist of five members, two of which shall be City staff members
and the remaining three of which shall be citizen members.  The City staff
members shall consist of one City Department of Public Health employee
appointed by the Health Commissioner and one City Utility Services Department
employee appointed by the Director of Utility Services.  The citizen members
shall be comprised of one licensed master plumber holding a valid active
license; one licensed journeyman plumber; and one person who shall be a
representative of the public.  The citizen members shall be appointed by the
President of the City Commission with the consent and approval of such
Commission and shall serve for terms of three years each.  Each member of such
Board shall be a citizen of the United States, and each member shall be a
resident of the City for not less than one year immediately preceding his
appointment.  No member, as such, shall receive any compensation.
   (b)   A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.  No decision or determination of the Board shall be effective
unless concurred in by a majority of the members thereof.
   (c)   The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairman, who shall serve
for a term of one year.  No person may serve as Chairman for more than two
consecutive terms.
   (d)   If any citizen board member is absent from three of any six
consecutive regularly scheduled meetings, his or her office shall immediately
become vacant.  Such member shall have the opportunity to explain his or her
absence to the City Commission and may be reappointed by a majority vote of the
City Commission to complete the balance of his or her term.
1367.04  INSPECTOR AS SECRETARY.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall act as the Secretary of the Plumbers Examining
Board and shall be chargeable with keeping accurate records of all
applications, minutes, proceedings, examinations, findings and decisions of
such Board, together with the performance of such other duties as the Board may
direct.  He shall receive no compensation in such capacity.  All applications
for plumbers' licenses, as required by this chapter shall be filed with the
Plumbing Inspector, as such Secretary, who shall promptly transmit the same to
the Board for appropriate action.
1367.05  POWERS OF BOARD.
   (a)   The Plumbers Examining Board is authorized and empowered to prepare,
conduct, supervise and grade examinations, written, oral or demonstrative, as
to matters involving average practical plumbing practice, of applicants for
plumbers' licenses; and, without discrimination, to prescribe the scope, extent
and standards of all such examinations.  An applicant for journeyman plumber's
license shall be examined with respect to this practical knowledge and
mechanical ability to perform any such work.  Such Board may determine that a
journeyman plumber’s examination given by another political subdivision is
equivalent to the examination prepared by the Board and may accept successful
completion of any such equivalent examination as satisfactory proof of the
competency of an applicant for a journeyman plumber’s license.  Such Board
shall have further power and authority to approve applications for any form of
license herein provided for; to disapprove any such application either for
failure to satisfactorily pass an examination; and, in the event of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or any related ordinance or law, to
revoke any plumber's license previously granted by the City; and shall have
power and authority to prescribe and enforce such rules, regulations and
procedure with respect to its own operation and to the approval or disapproval
of applications for plumber's license as it shall deem proper and as are not in
conflict with this chapter.
   (b)   Such Board shall have the power and authority to approve or disapprove
new materials and fixtures that may from time to time be presented to it.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every application for a plumber's license of any type shall be in writing,
and on such form as the Plumbers Examining Board prescribes. The application
shall set forth the name, citizenship, residence, place of business or
occupation of the applicant, and length of time he has been engaged in the
business or trade of plumbing, together with a stipulation that, if granted a
license, he will comply with all laws, ordinances, resolutions and public
regulations of competent authority relating to plumbing, sanitation and allied
work.
1367.07  VIOLATIONS OF LICENSING.
   It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector, or any other person to
report all violations of the provisions of this chapter to the Health
Commissioner, and to assemble and present to the Health Commissioner all known
available information, data and materials reflecting upon any such violation.
1367.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND APPRENTICE REGISTRATION.
   Upon written complaint of any person, and after investigation of the
complaint, the Plumbing Inspector may recommend to the Health Commissioner that
a plumber's license and/or apprentice's registration be revoked.  The Health
Commissioner upon recommendation of the Plumbing Inspector is authorized and
empowered to revoke, modify or suspend any license pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter for any of the following acts or omissions of the holder of any
such license and/or apprentice's registration:  fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation of any facts in obtaining a license and/or apprentice's
registration; obtaining a contract for work authorized under any such license
by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation of facts; negligence or incompetence in
the practice of contracting or the performance of any work; conversion of
property or funds belonging to another; failure to complete any contract or
work undertaken under the cloak of such license; unreasonable delay in the
prosecution of completion of any work to which such a licensee may be a party;
willful or fraudulent material departure from the plans or specifications
prescribed for any work undertaken by a licensee; violation of or disregard for
any provision of law or ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto resulting in injury or damage to any person or to the public; giving
false information on an application for a permit; or the filing of a voluntary
or involuntary petition in bankruptcy by such licensee or an assignment by him
for the benefit of his creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to
take charge of the property, assets and affairs of such licensee.  However, no
such license or apprentice registration shall be revoked without at least
fifteen (15) days advance written notice by the Health Commissioner to the
licensee or apprentice to such effect.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.09  JOURNEYMAN AND APPRENTICE PLUMBER FEES.
   Every journeyman plumber shall pay an examination fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) to the Clark County Combined Health District before taking such
journeyman plumber’s examination.  All apprentice plumbers shall be registered
by the board and all applicants for registration as apprentices shall pay a fee
of twenty–five dollars ($25.00) to the Clark County Combined Health District. 
All such applicants approved by the Board shall receive a registration card.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.10  JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER LICENSE.
   If, after paying such examination fee and taking such examination, the
Plumber’s Examining Board is satisfied of the competency of such applicant, the
Board shall issue a certificate to him directed to the Health Commissioner,
which certificate shall recite that such applicant has passed the examination
of a journeymanplumber.  The Health Commissioner, upon receipt of such
certificate, shall, upon the payment of the fee, hereinafter prescribed to the
Clark County Combined Health District, issue such applicant a license in
accordance with such certificate, authorizing him to follow and engage in the
occupation or trade of journeyman plumber in the City in the capacity specified
in such license. 
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.11  MASTER PLUMBER'S LICENSE.
   (a)   The Health Commissioner shall issue a master plumber's license upon
payment of a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and upon the applicant
providing evidence satisfactory to the Health Commissioner that the following
items are valid and remain in effect during the duration of the license.
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including completed
operations, with a minimum limit of liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and
property damage liability.
      (2)   City Income Tax Number.
      (3)   The execution by such applicant for such license of a bond in the
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) with sureties thereon to the approval of
the Health Commissioner, which surety shall be some approved general surety or
bonding company.  Such bond shall be conditioned to save the City and its
inhabitants harmless from all liability, loss or damage of whatsoever nature
that may result directly or indirectly to person or property by reason of any
act or neglect of any such licensee, or of any person in his employ or working
under his supervision, with respect to any work contemplated by the terms of
his license, and that such licensee will abide by the laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations governing plumbing work in the City then in force or thereafter
established by proper authority. 
 
   (b)   No reductions in fees shall be made for any part of the year having
elapsed.
 
   (c)   In the event a licensed master plumber desires a sewer tapper’s
license authorized by ordinance of the City, the same shall be issued to the
applicant without any further or additional bond being required of such
licensed master plumber upon payment to the Clark County Combined Health
District the fee provided for in such ordinance.
 
   (d)   All master plumber’s licenses shall expire on December 31 in each year
and may be renewed annually upon the payment of a fee of one hundred twenty
five dollars ($125.00) to the Clark County Combined Board Of Health.
 
   (e)   Must held either a valid Plumbing Contractor’s License issued by the
State of Ohio pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code or a valid City
of Springfield master plumber’s license within the immediately preceding thirty
one (31) days.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.12  JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER’S LICENSE.
   (a)   The Health Commissioner shall issue a journeyman plumber’s license
upon the payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the Clark County
Combined Health District, upon presentation of a valid certificate that the
applicant has passed the examination referred to in Section
1367.05 and
1367.09 and upon the licensee’s representation that such licensee will abide by
the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing plumbing work in the City
then in force or thereafter established by proper authority.
 
   (b)   All such journeyman plumber’s licenses shall expire on December 31 in
each year and may be renewed annually upon the payment of a fee of one hundred
fifty dollars ($50.00) to the Clark County Combined Board Of Health.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
1367.13  APPRENTICE PLUMBERS.
   Registration cards expire on December 31 in each year and may be renewed
annually upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the Clark
County Combined Board of Health.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.14  FAILURE TO RENEW LICENSE.
(a)     Any person engaged in the occupation of master plumber or journeyman
plumber who fails to secure such renewal of such license within thirty days
from the date of the expiration thereof, shall, before he receives another
license and is eligible to engage in the occupation of master plumber or
journeyman plumber, present himself to the Health Commissioner and make
application for an appropriate plumber’s license and pay the required fees.
(b)     No reductions in fees shall be made for any part of the year having
elapsed.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.15  APPLICATIONS FILED WITH HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   All applications approved by the Plumbers Examining Board shall be forthwith
filed with the Health Commissioner and all applications rejected shall be so
filed together with a written statement disclosing the reasons for such
rejection.  Every person who receives a license, card or badge, either as an
active or inactive master plumber, journeyman plumber or apprentice shall
register with the Secretary of the Plumbers Examining Board upon such forms as
the Board may prescribe, his name, place of business, home address, length of
time engaged in the occupation of plumbing and where he has served his
apprenticeship.
1367.16  PARTNERSHIP OR CORPORATION.
   Every partnership or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
plumbing as an active master plumber shall file with the Secretary of the
Plumbers Examining Board, a statement subscribed and sworn to by the partners
of such partnership or an officer of such corporation, stating the partners of
such partnership, its place of business or the officers of such corporation and
its place of business.  Every such partnership or corporation shall have at
least one partner of such partnership or one officer of such corporation, who
is a qualified licensed active master plumber and such partnership or
corporation may follow and engage in such business as an active master plumber
upon the license of such partner or officer.  If such partner or officer of
such partnership or corporation ceases to represent it actively, then no
partnership or corporation or employee thereof shall engage in such business of
master plumber until another person has qualified as herein provided.  In the
event more than one partner or officer engages in actual plumbing, such persons
shall be licensed as follows:  one partner or officer of the corporation or
partnership shall have an active master plumber's license and all other persons
who engage in actual plumbing shall have a journeyman plumber's license or
either an active or inactive master plumber's license.
1367.17  DISPLAY OF LICENSE NUMBER.
   It shall be the duty of every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of plumbing as an active master plumber to display his certificate of
license number on all vehicles while engaged in the business of plumbing as a
master plumber.  These numbers shall be attached in a legible manner in
contrasting colors on both sides of said vehicles with not less than two-inch
block numerals.  When a vehicle displaying a license number is no longer used
in the master plumber's plumbing business or in the event the master plumber's
license expires or is revoked, the master plumber shall either remove the
license number from the vehicle or paint over the license number with an opaque
paint so that the license number can no longer be seen.
1367.18  ADVERTISING AS PLUMBER WITHOUT LICENSE.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation in the City shall advertise or hold
himself out to the public as a plumber or licensed plumber when such person,
firm or corporation does not have such license or registration as provided for
in this chapter.
 
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation not in legal possession of a valid
active master plumber's license issued by the City shall engage in, or
represent himself as an active master plumber in the City or expose or use a
sign with the words "Master Plumber" or "Plumber" thereon, or to advertise with
similar words, for the purpose of implying that he is a master plumber or a
plumber.
 
1367.19  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   (a)   No licensed active master plumber shall allow his name to be used by
any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a plumbing permit.
 
   (b)   No licensed active master plumber shall employ any person to perform
plumbing work of a journeyman plumber who is not properly licensed as a
journeyman plumber or an inactive master plumber.
 
   (c)   Except as is otherwise provided by this chapter, no person within the
City on or after June 30, 2002 shall act or hold himself out to be or undertake
or perform any work as a plumbing contractor without first registering with the
Health Commissioner in the manner specified in this chapter.
 
1367.20  EMPLOYING UNLICENSED PLUMBERS.
No person shall permit any unlicensed plumber or unregistered plumbing
contractor to do any plumbing work upon any premises owned or under the control
of such person, except as provided and prescribed in this Plumbing Code.
1367.21  RECORD OF LICENSES.
   A record of all plumbers, sewer tappers, and maintenance licenses shall be
kept on file in the office of the Health Commissioner.
1367.22  EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter, relative to examinations and licenses
shall not apply to public utilities, public institutions, governmental
buildings, nor to mercantile, commercial or industrial plants, which maintain
departments for installation, maintenance and repair of plumbing in or on their
respective premises or plant, under expert supervision in conformity with the
laws of the State and the provisions prescribed in this chapter relative to
sanitation and plumbing, unless the person with expert qualifications who
supervises or is in charge of such maintenance department has first made an
application for a maintenance license.  The maintenance license application
shall include a fee sixty-five dollars ($65.00), which shall be paid to the
Clark County Combined Health District, shall be made in writing upon
application forms prescribed by the Health Commissioner for such purpose and
shall contain the name, residence, address and place of business of the
applicant, the length of time he has worked at plumbing work or has been
engaged in the business of plumbing and an agreement to abide by the laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations governing plumbing work in the City, then in
force or thereafter established.  The maintenance license shall expire on
December 31 of each year, and shall be renewed annually upon the payment of the
fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) to the Clark County Combined Health
District.  No reduction shall be made for any part of the year having elapsed
at the time such license is applied for.  If the Plumbing Inspector finds any
such plumbing to be contrary to this chapter relative to sanitation and
plumbing, and the person responsible for such violation of the law refuses to
rectify the conditions complained of, the Plumbing Inspector is authorized to
refuse permission for further work on same or the use thereof until such
improper plumbing installation or repair work has been corrected and made to
comply with the provisions as prescribed in this Plumbing Code.  However, no
plumbing installation work shall be done by any maintenance department until a
permit to do such work has been obtained as required in this chapter.
 
   (b)   This chapter shall not apply to departments, branches, service units
or buildings of the Federal, State and municipal governments, but Federal,
State and municipal governments are requested and urged to follow the local
custom and procedure of employing properly licensed plumbers on all public
housing projects, or to an individual person installing plumbing in accordance
with the provisions prescribed in this Plumbing Code, in a one-, two- and/or
three-family dwelling used exclusively for residential purposes, on premises
owned by such individual, provided such person secures a permit therefor, from
the Plumbing Inspector.  A permit for such plumbing work shall be granted by
the Plumbing Inspector upon the filing of an affidavit that all such work shall
be constructed and installed by such person without the help or hire of others,
and such permit shall be conditioned upon the approval of such work, at its
completion by the Plumbing Inspector, provided that nothing herein shall be
construed as a waiver of the provisions prescribed in this Plumbing Code
relative to sanitation and plumbing.
 
   (c)   Persons licensed as plumbing contractors under Chapter 4740 of the
Ohio Revised Code and not licensed under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code
as a heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor or a refrigeration
contractor, or an electrical contractor or a hydraulics contractor are
regulated under Chapter
1367 of the Codified Ordinances as to their operations as plumbing contractors
and are exempt from the regulation and licensing requirements under Sections
1367.03,
1367.05,
1367.06,
1367.08,
1367.09,
1367.10,
1367.11, and
1367.15 of this Chapter only as to their operations as plumbing contractors
which require a license under Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
1367.23  INSTALLATION OF CERTAIN APPLIANCES; EXCEPTIONS.
   Anything contained in this Plumbing Code to the contrary notwithstanding,
the installation of water softeners, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, air
conditioning equipment, ice makers, vending machines, coil cleaning machinery,
garbage disposal units, refrigerators, humidifiers or other similar appliances
as determined by the Plumbers Examining Board where such installation involves
attachment to water lines, waste lines, drains or vent stacks, hereinafter
called appliance installations, may be performed by a person holding a valid
master or journeyman plumber's license; a valid building contractor's license;
a valid specialty contractor registration; a valid plumbing contractor
registration; or by a mercantile establishment which makes appliance
installations through personnel trained in such installations and licensed in
accordance with the provisions of Sections
1367.24 to
1367.26, inclusive, hereinafter called establishment.  However, appliance
installations shall not include the attachment, extension or alteration of a
trap; of a waste or drain lines on the outlet side of a trap; a vent stack; nor
shall appliance installations include cutting into and inserting a fitting in a
water line exceeding three fourth inch in diameter in a commercial building,
three or more family dwelling or industrial building.
1367.24  LIMITED APPLIANCE LICENSE; EXAMINATION; BOND.
   (a)   The work described in Section
1367.23 shall not be performed unless the establishment is the holder of an
unexpired limited appliance dealers license, issued by the Health Commissioner,
for which a charge of forty dollars ($40.00) for each calendar year shall be
made.  Each license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
 
   (b)   Such work shall be performed only by the holder of an unexpired
limited appliance installers license, issued by the Health Commissioner for
which a charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each calendar year shall be
made.  Each license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
 
   (c)   No limited appliance installers license shall be issued unless the
applicant has satisfactorily passed an examination on his competency fitness
and ability to comply with State laws, City ordinances and the rules and
regulations of properly constituted public authorities in effect at the time,
relating to the type or types of work for the performance of which the
applicant seeks a license.  Such examination shall be administered by the
Plumbers Examining Board and shall be limited to questions or demonstrations
which fairly test the fitness and the ability of the applicant to perform such
work that is incidental to connections with water lines, waste lines, traps,
drains or vent stacks, in the installation of the appliances as defined above.
A twenty dollar ($20.00) examination fee shall be collected from the applicant
prior to such examination.  A licensee who shall fail to secure a renewal of
his license by January 31 may, at the discretion of the Board, be required to
pass another examination before being eligible for a new license.
 
   (d)   No limited appliance dealers license shall be issued until the
establishment has filed with the Health Commissioner:
      (1)   A certificate evidencing general liability insurance for the acts
of the establishment and its installers including completed operations coverage
for each person in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
and for each occurrence combined in single limit for bodily injury and property
damage and requiring not less than ten days written notice to the Health
Commissioner prior to cancellation; and
      (2)   A bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with
sureties approved by the City Manager, conditioned to save the City and its
inhabitants harmless from all liability, loss or damage of whatsoever nature
that may result, directly or indirectly, to persons or property by reason of
any wrongful act or neglect of any such licensee or any person in his employ or
working under his supervision, with respect to any work contemplated by the
terms of his license, or his employees' license, and further conditioned that
such establishment and his employees will abide by the laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations governing such work in the City then in force or thereafter
established by proper authority.
 
1367.25  PERMIT AND INSPECTION.
   (a)   Before undertaking the installation of a fixture or appliance the
proper party shall make application for a permit to the Health Commissioner and
shall pay the permit fees prescribed under Chapter
1369 to the Clark County Combined Health District.  This section shall not
apply to the servicing or repair or to the replacement of an appliance or
fixture, unless the replacement involves such substantial changes as to be
equivalent to a new installation.
 
   (b)   The establishment shall notify the Plumbing Inspector within twenty-
four hours of the completion time, and the Inspector shall inspect the
installation within forty-eight hours after the work has been done in
conformity with applicable ordinances of the City.  Inspections performed
outside of normal working hours (normal working hours are 7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. weekdays, other than holidays) shall require an extra charge of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per hour, portal to portal. Should the inspection disclose any
defect or violation of such ordinances, the same shall be corrected within
ninety-six hours after written notice has been given to the establishment of
such defect or violation.  There shall be a re-inspection fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each re-inspection of a commercial structure (i.e. all
structures other than one-, two- and three-family residential structures) re-
inspections to be paid to the Clark County Combined Health District.
(Ord. 08-190.  Passed 6-17-08.)
 
1367.26  PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PLUMBING CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   The requirements and procedures for specialty contractor registration shall
be as follows:
   (a)   Any person desiring a plumbing contractor registration shall make
written application therefor with the Health Commissioner.  Every application
shall be on forms prescribed by the Health Commissioner; shall furnish all
information and data required thereby.  No application shall be required of any
person desiring to renew a plumbing contractor registration previously issued
or renewed provided that the information and data contained in such person's
application therefor is correct or, if not, is corrected by or at the direction
of such person and that all other provisions of this action are complied with.
   (b)   No plumbing contractor registration shall be issued or continue in
effect pursuant thereto unless the applicant shall give evidence that the
following items are valid and remain in effect during the duration of the
subcontractor registration.
      (1)   The payment of a two hundred dollars ($200.00) fee, to be paid to
the Clark County Combined Health District, upon application for a plumbing
contractor registration; and the payment of a one hundred twenty five dollar
($125.00) fee, to be paid to the Clark County Combined Health District, for
each renewal thereof.  Payment shall be made to the City Treasurer.
      (2)   Proof that the applicant holds a valid and unexpired license issued
pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including completed
operations, with a minimum limit of liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage liability.  Subcontractors performing demolition work shall provide
collapse hazard coverage ("c" exclusion deleted) and shall also provide
explosion hazard coverage ("x" exclusion deleted) if explosive materials are to
be used.  Subcontractors performing excavation work shall provide both collapse
and underground hazard coverage ("c" and "u" exclusions deleted).
      (4)   Proof of Workers' Compensation coverage, if coverage is required by
the State of Ohio.
      (5)   City income tax number.
      (6)   The execution by such applicant for such license of a bond in the
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) with sureties thereon to the approval of
the City Manager.  Such bond shall be conditioned to save the City and its
inhabitants harmless from all loss or damage of whatsoever nature that may
result from any violation by the plumbing contractor and/or his authorized
agents of any law, ordinance or rule governing work contemplated by the terms
of such plumbing contractor registration which are then in force or thereafter
established by proper authority.
   (c)   The Health Commissioner shall issue a certificate of plumbing
contractor registration to any person who has complied with the provisions of
this section.  Every certificate of plumbing contractor registration issued or
renewed pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year for
which the same has been issued or last renewed unless otherwise renewed prior
thereto in accordance with the provisions of this section.  No fee required
under the provisions of this section after payment thereof to the City shall be
refunded for any cause whatsoever.
   (d)   Every certificate of plumbing contractor registration issued pursuant
to this Section shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the
certificate of plumbing contractor registration was issued or renewed.  Holders
of a certificate of plumbing contractor registration may apply to renew their
certificate of plumbing contractor registration during the period November 15
through December 31 of the year in which the certificate of plumbing contractor
registration was issued or previously renewed by making application for renewal
and paying the renewal fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) to the
Clark County Combined Health District.  A certificate of plumbing contractor
registration which is permitted to expire may not be renewed and a holder of an
expired certificate of plumbing contractor registration who wishes to become
registered must apply for a new certificate of plumbing contractor registration
pursuant to the provisions of this Section and pay the application fee of two
hundred dollars to the Clark County Combined Health District.
      (Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
1367.27  REVOCATION OF PLUMBING CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The Health Commissioner is authorized and empowered to revoke a
plumbing contractor registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The plumbing contractor no longer holds a valid and unexpired
license issued pursuant to Chapter 4740 of the Ohio Revised Code to operate as
a plumbing contractor, or
      (2)   The specialty plumbing no longer has in effect the insurance
described in Subsection
1367.26(b)(3), or
      (3)   The specialty contractor no longer has in effect the workers
compensation coverage described in Subsection
1367.26(b)(4), or
      (4)   The specialty contractor no longer has in effect the bond described
in Subsection
1367.26(b)(6), or any combination of the foregoing items (1) through (4).
 
   (b)   No such plumbing contractor registration shall be revoked without at
least fifteen (15) days advance written notice by the Health Commissioner to
the plumbing contractor to such effect and without affording to such plumbing
contractor the opportunity to appeal to the Board of Building Appeals by
submitting the appeal in writing and stating the reason for the appeal. 
Appeals must be filed with the Secretary of the Board of Building Appeals
within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of revocation.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1369
Plumbing Permits and Fees
 
(NOTE:  Chapter
1369 was repealed by Ordinance 02-27, January 22, 2002, and reinstated by
Ordinance 02-194, April 30, 2002.)
 
1369.01   Plumbing permits.
1369.02   Permit application and fee.
1369.03   Review of plans fee.
1369.04   Exceptions.
1369.05   Change of style or location.
1369.06   Work designated by permit.
1369.07   Expiration of permit.
1369.08   Endorsement of Director of Inspections.
1369.09   Permit required.
1369.10   To whom permits may be issued.
1369.11   Permits not assignable.
1369.12   License for scavengers.
1369.13   Investigation of illegal or unauthorized work charge.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Building permit fees - see BLDG. Ch.
1313
Plumbing inspections - see BLDG. Ch.
1361.03(c)
 
1369.01  PLUMBING PERMITS.
   No person shall install plumbing, water service or do work for which a
permit is required, on any premises in the City without first having obtained
such a permit.
 
1369.02  PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (a)   All applications for plumbing permits shall be made on forms approved
by the Plumbing Inspector.  No application for a permit shall be processed, nor
any permit issued, until the fees prescribed therefor have been paid to the
City.  The following fees are hereby prescribed.
 
(1) For one-, two-, and three-family residential structures:
   Plumbing permit                       $30.00
   Fixtures                              10.00 each
   Water heater replacement (also must   20.00
    have new T & P valve)
   Water softeners (new & replacement)   20.00
    Sewer lines installed (new &
    replacement) between curb and
    building for one-, two-, and three-   $30.00, plus
   family structure residential          $1.00 per lineal foot, not to exceed
    applications for 1 lineal foot to 100 a total of $130.00
    lineal feet for each lineal foot over
    100 lineal feet
    Water lines installed (new &
    replacement) between curb and
    building for one-, two-, and three-   $30.00, plus
   family structure residential          $1.00 per lineal foot, not to exceed
    applications for 1 lineal foot to 100 a total of $130.00
    lineal feet for each lineal foot over
    100 lineal feet
(2) Commercial structures, (i.e. all structures other than one-, two-, and
    three-family residential structures):
   Plumbing permit                       $50.00
   Fixtures                              12.00 each
   Water heater replacement (also must   20.00
    have new T & P valve)
   Water softeners (new & replacement)   20.00
    Sewer lines installed (new &
    replacement) between curb and         $50.00, plus
   building for commercial structure     $1.00 per lineal foot, not to exceed
    applications for 1 lineal foot to 100 a total of $150.00
    lineal feet for each lineal foot over
    100 lineal feet
    Water lines installed (new &
    replacement) between curb and         $50.00, plus
   building for commercial structure     $1.00 per lineal foot, not to exceed
    applications for 1 lineal foot to 100 a total of $150.00
    lineal feet for each lineal foot over
    100 lineal feet
   In addition to all other fees charged for permits and inspections for
commercial structures, an additional charge of $100.00 per inspection will be
charged for routine inspections [i.e. inspections not qualifying as re-
inspections under paragraph (b) of this section or under sections
1369.13 and
1367.25 of the City‘s Codified Ordinances] over and above the following maximum
number of routine inspections:
 
 
Plumbing Permit Fee Maximum Routine Inspections
Up to $500          8
$501 to $750        10
$751 to $1,000      12
Multiples of $1,000 10 per $1,000
   (b)   In addition, a fee shall be charged as provided for in Section
1367.25 of the City's Codified Ordinances whenever a re-inspection is necessary
as a result of work being improperly or incompletely performed or as a result
of an inspector being unable to complete a scheduled inspection through the
fault of the permit applicant or his agent.
(Ord. 08-190.  Passed 06-17-08.)
1369.03  REVIEW OF PLANS FEE.
   When plans are required to be submitted pursuant to this Plumbing Code or
the Ohio Plumbing Code, a fee for the review of such plans shall be charged as
follows:
 
 
Plans Involving Fixtures Fee
1 to 20 fixtures         $   40.00
21 to 40 fixtures        $   60.00
41 to 60 fixtures        $   80.00
61 to 100 fixtures       $   100.00
Over 100 fixtures        $   150.00
(Ord. 08-190.  Passed 06-17-08.)
1369.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   No permit shall be required for plumbing repairs or replacements which are
not subject to or required to be tested or inspected under the provisions
prescribed in this Plumbing Code or the Ohio Plumbing Code.
 
1369.05  CHANGE OF STYLE OR LOCATION.
   Where the style or location of a fixture has been changed, a permit for such
work shall be required, such as removing a leg tub and replacing with a built-
in tub; or an ordinary sink replaced with a cabinet sink; or a range boiler
replaced with an automatic heater; or when the location of an old fixture is
moved more than three feet from its present waste and vent outlet.
 
1369.06  WORK DESIGNATED BY PERMIT.
   Each permit so issued shall designate the work to be done thereunder and in
no case shall any work be done which is not specified therein; nor shall any
work be commenced or prosecuted until such permit has been issued and in
possession of the person in charge of such work.
 
1369.07  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   If the work authorized by permit is not commenced within six months from the
date of its issue, such permit shall be deemed to have expired.
 
1369.08  ENDORSEMENT OF DIRECTOR OF INSPECTIONS.
   No permit shall be issued, nor shall any fee for such a permit be accepted
or any work be authorized to be done under any permit until the Manager of
Inspection Services has endorsed his approval thereon with respect to the
requirements of this Building Code other than plumbing, the Zoning Code and any
other ordinance the provisions of which may affect the work to be done under
such permit.
 
1369.09  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in Section
1367.23, no person, firm or corporation owning or controlling any building in
the City in which plumbing may hereafter be installed or existing piping
altered or disconnected, or any plumber or other person shall knowingly allow
or permit water from the Municipal water supply to flow through such piping or
plumbing system until a permit for such work has been obtained, the same has
been tested, inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector as herein
provided, and the fees for such permit have been paid to the City.  However, no
fee shall be paid for the permit to disconnect from the Municipal water or
sewer system.
 
1369.10  TO WHOM PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED.
   No permits shall be issued to any person, to do or cause to be done any
construction or installation of plumbing regulated by this Plumbing Code except
to a person holding a valid, unexpired and unrevoked active master plumber's
license, except when and as otherwise provided and prescribed in Sections
1367.22 and
1367.23.  In the case of a partnership or corporation engaging in the business
of plumbing as an active master plumber, permits for plumbing work to be
performed by the partnership or corporation may be issued only to the partner
or officer holding a valid, active master plumber's license.
(Ord. 93-322.  Passed 9-21-93.)
 
1369.11  PERMITS NOT ASSIGNABLE.
   In the event different portions of work are contracted for by different
plumbers, each plumber must take out the permits covering his portion of the
work.  Such permits may not be assigned.
 
1369.12  LICENSE FOR SCAVENGERS.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the collection and removal of the contents
of privy vaults or sewage tanks until a license therefor is obtained from the
Health Commissioner.  The license shall be issued for a term of one year upon
the payment of an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per operation
and ten dollars ($10.00) per vehicle.
 
   (b)   Applications for Scavenger Licenses shall be on a form prescribed by
the Health Commissioner.  The license shall state the conditions under which
the material shall be removed and method of disposal.  All such licenses shall
expire on December 31.
 
1369.13  INVESTIGATION OF ILLEGAL OR UNAUTHORIZED WORK CHARGE.
   When any person, firm or corporation has commenced work on a project without
first procuring the necessary permit therefor, the Plumbing Inspector shall
make a thorough investigation to determine whether all work performed prior to
the subsequent issuance date of the specified permit conforms to all pertinent
provisions of this Plumbing Code.  The charge for making such investigations
prior to the issuance of the necessary permit shall be the additional charge
determined as follows:
 
 
One-, two-, and three-family structures $30.00 plus and additional 25% of the
                                        amount of the required permit fee.
All other structures                    $50.00 plus and additional 25% of the
                                        amount of the required permit fee.
 
(Ord. 03-353.  Passed 10-28-03.)
 
 
 
 
TITLE SEVEN - Vacant Property Registration Program
Chap.
1380.   Administration of Vacant Property Registration Program.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1380
Administration of Vacant Property Registration Program
 
1380.01   Adoption; Purpose.
1380.02   Applicability.
1380.03   Definitions.
1380.04   Owner Required to Act; Enforcement Authority.
1380.05   Registration Required and Penalty.
1380.06   Notice to City of Foreclosure, Filing, Fee.
1380.07   Liability.
1380.08   Appeals.
1380.09   Assignment of Registration Fees, Penalties, and Fines.
1380.10   Exemptions.
1380.11   Removal from Registry.
1380.12   Noncompliance; Additional Remedies.
1380.13   Savings Clause.
1380.14   Severability.
1380.15   Effective Date.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Appeals - see Board of Building Appeals Section
1323.07
Penalties- see Class A Civil Offenses Section
1324.02
Penalties - see Class B Civil Offenses Section
1324.03
Fines - see Civil Fines Section
1324.99
County Land Reutilization Corporations - see Ohio Revised Code Chapter 1724.
Liens - see Ohio Revised Code Chapter 715.261
 
1380.01  ADOPTION; PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a vacant property
registration program and to regulate the maintenance of properties which are in
the foreclosure process, abandoned or vacant. This chapter is intended to
reduce and prevent neighborhood blight, to avoid the creation and maintenance
of public nuisances, to ameliorate conditions that threaten the public health,
safety and welfare, to promote neighborhood stability and occupancy by
preserving the condition and appearance of residential properties and the worth
and activity of commercial and industrial properties, and to maintain property
values and assessments.
 
   (b)   Furthermore, the City recognizes and acknowledges the research of the
Clark County Combined Health District (the "Health District"). Specifically,
the Health District's research documents the deleterious effects of vacant
properties in our neighborhoods including chronic illness, environmental
stressors, lead poisoning, poor air quality, physical hazards to children and
adult residents and increase in fire fighter injuries. Additional deleterious
effects, includes but are not limited to, increased violence and crimes such
as: narcotics use, sale, and manufacture, juvenile delinquency, stolen
property, juvenile runaways, sex offenders, trespassing, vandalism, dumping,
burglary and prostitution.  The blight caused by vacancies also has a chilling
economic affect in lowering home values and slowing economic growth which has
an indirect but measurable effect on the overall health of the residents in the
neighborhoods.
 
   (c)   There is hereby adopted, then, for the aforementioned purposes and for
the purpose of providing a means of identifying the owner and/or responsible
entities of vacant and/or abandoned properties within the corporate limits of
the City, having complete contact information on record for these properties
and responsible parties, a registration and maintenance requirement for vacant
and/or abandoned properties.
 
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to waive, relieve or
otherwise excuse an owner of property from compliance with all applicable
codes, ordinances, statutes or laws and the owner shall at all times remain
responsible and liable therefore. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of Springfield; Springfield Property Maintenance, Building, or Fire Code;
or the Ohio Revised Code, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
relieve an owner or interested party from duties imposed pursuant to any
regulatory code, ordinance, statute, or law of the City or State of Ohio.
 
1380.02  APPLICABILITY.
This chapter shall be applicable to all residential structures located within
the City pursuant to exemptions listed in this chapter.
 
1380.03  DEFINITIONS.
As used throughout this chapter:
 
"Abandoned" means a structure that is unoccupied as the result of the
relinquishment of possession or control by an owner or other person with the
right of possession or control of the structure, a mortgagor or the mortgagor's
assigns whether or not the mortgagor or mortgagor's assigns have relinquished
equity and title. A structure may be deemed abandoned when there is evidence of
conditions, taken separately or as a whole, that would lead a reasonable person
to conclude that the property was abandoned, including, but not limited to,
evidence of overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, mail, past due utility notices, or other means of notice by
publication, the accumulation of junk, litter, trash, or debris, absence of
windows or window treatments, absence of furnishings and personal items,
statements of neighbors, delivery agents or similarly situated persons that the
property is abandoned.
 
"Codes" means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Springfield or those
adopted by said Codified Ordinances.
 
"Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City of
Springfield or such person as the Director may designate to act on behalf of
the Director.
 
"Owner" means the registered owner of a property, any person who holds legal or
equitable title to the property, is a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession,
assignee of rents, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm
or corporation that is directly or indirectly in control of a property. The
owner of a property in default or for which aoreclosure action is pending or
for which a judgment in foreclosure has been issued shall include the
mortgagee, the successor in interest to the mortgagee, the lender or servicing
company and any agent acting for the mortgagee, its successors, or a lender or
servicing company. Under this definition, there may be more than one "owner" of
a property for purposes of this chapter.
 
"Vacant" means a structure that is not lawfully occupied or that otherwise
qualifies as "abandoned" under this section. A property shall be considered
vacant when it has been unoccupied for ninety (90) days. Multi-family
residential structures shall be considered vacant when all of the dwelling
units are not lawfully occupied or that otherwise qualifies as "abandoned"
under this chapter.
 
1380.04  OWNER REQUIRED TO ACT; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The owner of any structure that has become vacant as defined in
Section
1380.03  "Definitions" within thirty days after the structure first becomes
vacant, within thirty days of receiving notice that a structure is vacant, or
within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, whichever is
later, shall file a "Vacant Property Registration Form", as prescribed by the
City Manager. The "Vacant Property Registration Form" shall be filed with the
applicable fee for each such structure with the Director or his or her
designee.
 
   (b)   The registration statement shall remain valid for one year from the
date of registration. The registering party shall be required to annually renew
the registration as long as the structure remains vacant and shall pay an
annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each residential
structure. The registering party shall not be entitled to a refund of all or
any part of the registration fee should the structure no longer be deemed
vacant during the annual registration period.
 
   (c)   The owner shall notify the Director or his or her designee within
twenty days of any change in the registration information by filing an "Amended
Vacant Property Registration Form", also prescribed by the City Manager. There
shall be no fee for filing an "Amended Vacant Property Registration Form". The
"Vacant" or "Amended Property Registration Form" shall be deemed prima facie
proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner of the
structure. An owner shall be liable under this section for failing to register
a vacant structure, paying an appropriate annual registration fee, or timely
updating any change in registration.
 
   (d)   In addition to other information required by the Director, the City
Manager shall prescribe a "Vacant Property Registration Form".  The form shall
require the disclosure of the following information, if known:
      (1)   The street address of the property,
      (2)   Permanent parcel number assigned by the County Auditor,
      (3)   The date upon which the property became vacant (if known to the
owner),
      (4)   The case name and case number of any foreclosure proceeding with
respect to the property,
      (5)   The case name and case number of any bankruptcy proceeding with
respect to the property,
      (6)   Name and telephone number of a person twenty-one years of age or
older, designated by the owner as the authorized agent for receiving notices of
code violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner in connection
with the enforcement of this chapter. This person must maintain an office in
Ohio, or must actually reside within Clark County, Ohio. An owner who meets the
requirements of this subsection as to location of residence or office may
designate him- or herself as agent. By designating an authorized agent under
the provisions of this subsection the owner is consenting to receive any and
all notices of code violations concerning the registered building and all
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding
brought to enforce code provisions concerning the registered structure by
service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this subsection shall be
deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for the
purposes of this subsection until the owner notifies the Director or his or her
designee in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner files a
new annual registration statement and/or amendment. An owner shall be liable
under this section for failing to register an authorized agent.
      (7)   Such other information as the Director may reasonably require.
 
   (e)   The owner of any vacant structure shall cause an initial physical
inspection of the structure to be made and secure the structure in accordance
with this chapter. An owner shall be liable under this section for failing to
inspect the property or structure or for failing to maintain the inspection
reports as required by this section.
 
   (f)   Any owner who fails to register a vacant structure under the
provisions of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by
posting at the structure, any and all notices of code violations and all
process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the structure and premises.
 
   (g)   The Director may issue rules and regulations for the administration of
this section. These rules may designate board-up materials and methods which
must be used when securing a structure beyond the standard provided so that the
boarding is reasonably incapable of being removed by trespassers or others
acting without the owner's consent.
 
1380.05  REGISTRATION REQUIRED AND PENALTY.
   (a)   The owner of any vacant structure shall file a "Vacant Property
Registration Form" for each such structure with the Director or his or her
designee on the form provided for such purpose. Any such registration statement
shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any
administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the
City against the owner or owners of the structure.
 
   (b)   The owner of any vacant structure who fails to file a registration
statement for each such structure within the timeframes established by this
chapter or who fails to update a change in registration information within the
timeframes established by this chapter shall be subject to a $25 per day
administrative penalty with a maximum penalty of $750.
 
   (c)   Registration fees, penalties, and fines associated with and collected
on behalf of the Vacant Property Registration Program shall be deposited in a
specific Finance Department account in the annual budget of the City of
Springfield and shall only be expended for the specific purposes set forth in
this chapter.
 
   (d)   If a property is scheduled or placed on the voluntary demolition list,
the City may waive in writing the registration fee for that specific property.
 
1380.06  NOTICE TO CITY OF FORECLOSURE, FILING, FEE.
Any person who files a complaint in any court of competent jurisdiction for
foreclosure involving real property located within the City of Springfield on
which there is a building or structure shall notify the City of the filing of
the foreclosure complaint and shall file a complete copy of the foreclosure
complaint with the Department of Community Development within ten (10) calendar
days after filing the complaint with the relevant court. The notice to the City
shall be on a form as prescribed by the Director.
 
1380.07  LIABILITY.
   (a)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the owner, the owner's agent
for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents, and any other
person managing or controlling a structure or premises in any part of which
there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any
violation therein, existing or occurring, or which may have existed or
occurred, at or during any time when such person is or was the person owning or
managing, controlling, or acting as agent in regard to said structure or
premises and is subject to injunctions, abatement orders or other remedial
orders.
 
   (b)   The liabilities  and obligations  imposed on an owner  shall attach to
any financial institution, mortgage company, or any other person or entity with
or without an interest in the structure or premises who knowingly takes any
action in any judicial or  administrative proceeding that is  intended to delay
issuance or  enforcement of any remedy for  any violation of the Codes,
provided that with respect to fines such person shall be liable only for fines
which accrue on or after the date of such action and further provided that no
liability shall be imposed under this section for any action taken in any
proceeding, including a proceeding to foreclose on a lien, that does not delay
or prevent the prosecution of any action brought by the City to enforce the
adopted Codes.
 
   (c)   In the event the City, due to lack of response of an owner or agent,
is required to take action, through its own efforts or via a contract for such
services, to abate a nuisance at a vacant property the owner will be billed for
the cost of the abatement to include all labor and materials needed to correct
the violation.  Nuisance abatements shall include, but are not be limited to,
elimination of hazardous conditions, cutting of weeds and overgrowth, securing
and/or boarding of a structure, trash cleanup and disposal and demolition.
 
1380.08  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order of the Director may appeal such order
directly to the Office of the City Manager within five (5) days of receiving
the Director's initial decision.  If the aggrieved person is still aggrieved,
they may then appeal such order to the Board of Building Appeals in accordance
with the procedure set out in Section
1323.07 of these Codified Ordinances
 
1380.09  ASSIGNMENT OF REGISTRATION FEES, PENALTIES, AND FINES.
   (a)   Failure to register a vacant residential property as required by this
chapter is guilty of a Class B Civil Offense further detailed in Section
1324.03 and Section
1324.99.
 
   (b)   Failure to file a Notice of Foreclosure pursuant to Section
1380.06 is guilty of a Class A Civil Offense further detailed in Section
1324.02 and Section
1324.99.
 
1380.10  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Any property with foreclosure proceedings with a mortgage held through
the Federal Housing Finance Agency ("FHFA"), who acts as a conservator (i.e.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) is exempt from the fee requirements of this
registry, but are requested to notify the City of properties that may be
subject to this list sans FHFA involvement.
 
   (b)   This exemption is specifically in accordance with the doctrine of
preemption through Article VI, paragraph two (2) of the United State
Constitution. 
 
   (c)   This chapter does not apply to County Land Reutilization Corporations
organized under Ohio Revised Code Chapter 1724.
 
1380.11  REMOVAL FROM REGISTRY.
   (a)   Any owner or mortgagee of a vacant residential property may apply to
the Director to remove a vacant property from the City registry at such time as
the property no longer constitutes a vacant property.
 
   (b)   Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this
section shall be granted or denied by the Director within thirty (30) days, and
if no such determination is made within thirty (30) days then the application
for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted.
 
   (c) If the property was sold, a copy of the HUD-1 statement and Security
Deed must be provided as proof. If the property is rented by a tenant, a copy
of the a fully executed lease, duly signed by both the landlord and the tenant
(s) must be provided as proof.
 
1380.12  NONCOMPLIANCE; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whenever a property is deemed abandoned or vacant pursuant to the
terms of this chapter and is not maintained pursuant to the terms of this
chapter and the City of Springfield Codified Ordinances, the Director or
designee, may order the abatement of the violation or any other action that may
be required including, but not limited to, demolition. Any abatement action
shall be conducted in accordance with the City of Springfield Codified
Ordinances. The cost of any action taken by the City shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure or violation is located and shall be a
lien upon such real estate in accordance with Ohio Revised Code 715.261.
 
   (b)   In addition to the penalties set forth in in this chapter, the City
may pursue such other remedies it deems necessary to carry out the purpose and
intent of this chapter. Those additional remedies may include issuing
appropriate administrative orders under this and other chapters of the City of
Springfield Codified Ordinances, injunctions, mandatory relief, restraining
orders, and damages, appointment of a receiver, issuing assessments, and such
other relief as may be allowed in law or equity.
 
1380.13  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or
act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending
litigation or prosecution of any right established or occurring prior to the
effective date of this chapter, as amended.
 
1380.14  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, clauses, phrase or portion of this chapter is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion thereof.
 
1380.15  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of Title Seven entitled the "Vacant Property Registration
Program" shall become and be effective on or after January 1, 2020.
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART FIFTEEN—FIRE PREVENTION CODE
 
Chap.   
1501.   Fire Code Adoption; General Provisions.
 
Chap.   
1503.   Administration and Enforcement.
 
Chap.   
1507.   Special Provisions.
 
Chap.   
1511.   Open Burning.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1501
Fire Code Adoption; General Provisions
1501.01   Ohio Fire Code adoption.
1501.02   Owner’s responsibility.
1501.03   Occupant’s responsibility.
1501.04   Military transports.
1501.05   Interpretation upon conflict.
 
1501.01  OHIO FIRE CODE ADOPTION.
   (a)   Adoption.  The 2017 Ohio Fire Code (cited as “OFC”) as promulgated by
the State Fire Marshal of Ohio Effective December 15, 2017, and as published in
Chapter 1301:7-7 of the Ohio Administrative Code (cited as “OAC”) is hereby
adopted by The City of Springfield, Ohio, as amended by the deletions and
modifications described in this Section
1501.01, and is incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten by this Section
1501.01.  This Springfield Fire Prevention Code is cited as the “SFPC.”
   (b)   References.  The term “the jurisdiction” as used on the OFC shall mean
The City of Springfield, Ohio.  The terms “fire code official” and “local fire
code official’ as used in the OFC shall mean the Fire Official, as that term is
defined in Section
1503.01 of this SFPC.  The term “Building Code” as used in this SFPC shall mean
the relevant building code adopted in Part Thirteen of the Codified Ordinances
of The City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (c)   Amendments.
      (1)   OFC Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Title.  The rules set forth in Chapter 1301:7-7 of the Administrative Code
shall be known as the “Ohio Fire Code” abbreviated “OFC,” and hereinafter may
also be referred to as the “state fire code.”
      (2)   OFC Section 101.2 is amended to read as follows:
Scope.  The SFPC establishes fire marshal rules for the administration and
enforcement of authorities granted to the fire marshal and fire code officials
in Chapters 3701, 3731, 3737, 3741, 3743, 3781, and 3791 of the Revised Code
including but not limited to, regulations affecting or relating to structures,
processes, premises and safeguards regarding: 
         1.   The hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage,
handling or use of structures, materials or devices;
         2.   Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises;
         3.   Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy
or operation;
         4.   Matters related to the construction, extension, repair,
alteration or removal of protection systems; and
         5.   Conditions affecting the safety of firefighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
      (3)   OFC Section 101.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
Appendices.  The provisions of Appendix D “Fire Apparatus Access Roads” of the
OFC is adopted and made part of this SFPC.  Except as provided in the preceding
sentence, provisions in the appendices, of any “International Fire Code” are
not adopted as part of this SFPC.
      (4)   OFC Section 101.4 is amended to read as follows:
Severability.  It is the intention of the City Commission that each separate
provision of this SFPC shall be deemed independent of all other provisions
herein, and it is further the intention of the City Commission that if any
provision of this SFPC is declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall
remain valid and enforceable.
      (5)   OFC Section 102.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
Change of use or occupancy.  No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of
any structure that would place the structure in a different division of the
same group or occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, unless such
structure is made to comply with the requirements of this SFPC and the Building
Code.
      (6)   OFC Section 103.1 is deleted.
      (7)   OFC Section 104.1.1 is deleted.
      (8)   OFC Section 104.8 is amended to read as follows:
Variances by the Fire Chief.  Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this SFPC, the Fire Chief, in the
Fire Chief’s discretion, may modify any provision of this SFPC or any other
administrative rule promulgated by the Fire Chief upon written application by
an affected party and upon demonstration by that party of both of the
following:
         1.   That the variance will not threaten the public health, safety or
welfare; and
         2.   That the party will provide measures to protect the public
health, safety and welfare that are substantially equivalent to the measures
otherwise required under the state fire code.
            (a)   104.8.1 A request for a variance submitted pursuant to this
rule shall only be considered upon production of any information or
documentation requested by the Fire Chief.  The particulars of such variance
when granted shall be in writing, entered upon the records of the Fire Chief
and furnished to the applicant and the authority having jurisdiction, if said
authority is other than the Fire Chief.
            (b)   104.8.2 Unless otherwise stipulated by the Fire Chief upon
the granting of a variance, each variance granted pursuant to this paragraph
shall automatically terminate one year from the date of its issuance.
            (c)   104.8.3 There shall be no automatic renewals of any variance
granted pursuant to this paragraph.  Each variance shall be specifically
applied for in writing by the requesting party and independently considered by
the Fire Chief.
      (9)   OFC Section 105.1.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
Explosives.  A permit is required for the storage of explosives and explosive
materials.
      (10)   OFC Section 105.1.1.1 is amended by the addition thereto of
Section 105.1.1.1.5 to read as follows:
LP-gas system.  A permit is required for the stationary installation or
modification to a stationary LP-gas system.
      (11)   OFC Section 105.1.1.1 is amended by the addition thereto of
Section 105.1.1.1.6 to read as follows:
Standpipe system.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 105.7.17, a permit
is required for the removal of a standpipe system or appurtenances.
      (12)   OFC Section 105.7.18 is amended to read as follows:
Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies.  A permit is required for
the construction of an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent
having an area in excess of 400 square feet (19m2) or a canopy in excess of 200
square feet (37m2).
      (13)   OFC Section 108.1 is amended to read as follows:
Appeals of orders.  Appeals of orders made by the Fire Official relative to the
application of this SFPC shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
1503 of the SFPC.
      (14)   OFC Section 109.1.5 is amended to read as follows:
Fire code enforcement.  If upon inspection or investigation, the Fire Official,
or a certified fire safety inspector believes that this SFPC has been violated,
the Fire Official, or certified fire safety inspector shall issue a citation to
the responsible person in accordance with this SFPC.
      (15)   OFC Section 109.1.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
If a violation of this SFPC has no direct or immediate relationship to safety
or health, the Fire Official or the certified fire safety inspector may issue a
notice in lieu of a citation with respect to such de minimus violation in
accordance with paragraphs 109.1.5.1.1 through 109.1.5.1.4 of this rule.
      (16)   OFC Section 109.1.5 is amended by the addition thereto of Section
109.1.5.2 to read as follows:
Enforcement to remedy dangerous conditions.  If the Fire Official or certified
fire safety inspector, upon examination or inspection, finds a building or
other structure especially liable to fire or endangers life or other buildings
or property, or finds a building or any premises with combustible, explosive or
flammable materials which are dangerous to the safety of persons, finds any
structure, tank, container or vehicle used for the storage, handling or
transportation of flammable or combustible materials to be dangerous to the
safety of persons, the Fire Official or certified safety inspector shall issue
a citation in accordance with this SFPC.
      (17)   OFC Section 109.3 and 109.4 along with all of their subdivisions
are deleted.
      (18)   OFC Section 112 is captioned “Fire Official permit fees.”
      (19)   OFC Section 112.1 is amended to read as follows:
Permit fees.  The fee for all permits issued by the fire official shall be
seventy-five dollars unless specifically indicated otherwise in this SFPC.
         (a)   112.1.1 Fees for multiple permits. When multiple permits are
applied for to the fire code official for a specific event or approved
construction at the same location, such permit application may be consolidated
into a single permit application.  The total fees otherwise required for such
multiple permits may be consolidated into a single fee, which may be reduced at
the discretion of the fire code official in an amount proportionate to the
corresponding inspection activity.
         Exceptions:
            1.   If a manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks has paid an
original or a renewal licensure application fee in accordance with paragraph
(Q)(1)(3317.1) of rule 1301:7-7-33 of the Ohio Administrative Code, then the
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks is not required to pay a fee for the
Class I magazine storage permit required by paragraph (c)(9) of this Section.
            2.   A permit fee is not required for the construction of a
temporary membrane structure or tent erected on state property.
      (20)   OFC Sections 112.2 and 112.3 are deleted.
      (21)   OFC Sections 113 through 116 and all of their subdivisions are
deleted.
      (22)   OFC Sections 118 through 124 and all of their subdivisions are
deleted.
      (23)   All references to the International Building Code in this SFPC are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Building Code as adopted in
Section
1301.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (24)   All references to the ICC Electrical Code in this SFPC are deleted
and replaced with a reference to the National Electrical Code as adopted in
Section
1301.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (25)   All references to the International Mechanical Code in this SFPC
are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Mechanical Code as
adopted in Section
1301.03 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (26)   All references to the International Residential Code in this SFPC
are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Residential Code for One-,
Two-, and Three-Family Dwellings as adopted in Section
1301.04 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (27)   All references to the International Property Maintenance Code in
this SFPC are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Property Maintenance
Code as adopted in Section
1305.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (28)   All references to the International Plumbing Code in this SFPC are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Plumbing Code as adopted in
Section
1361.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (29)   All references to the International Fuel Gas Code in this SFPC are
deleted and replaced with a reference to the Fuel Gas Code for The City of
Springfield, Ohio as adopted in Section
1301.05 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (30)   All references to the International Energy Conservation Code in
this SFPC are deleted and replaced with a reference to the Ohio Building Code
as adopted in Section
1301.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (31)   OFC Section 307, OPEN BURNING AND RECREATIONAL FIRES, is amended
to read as follows:
         (1)    307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or
authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and
approved in accordance with this Section.
            (a)   307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is
offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions or when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall
be prohibited.
         (2)    307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire
code official in accordance with the SFPC prior to kindling a fire for all open
burning, including, recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management
practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, a bonfire or a
recreational fire.  Application for such approval shall only be presented by
and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be
kindled.
            (a)   307.2.1 Authorization. Where required by state or local law
or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from
the state or local air and water quality management authority, provided that
all conditions specified in the authorization are followed.
         (3)   307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is
authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person
responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a
hazardous or objectionable situation.
         (4)    307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less
than 50 feet (15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to
prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions:
               1.   Fires in approved containers (i.e. containers approved by
the fire official as safe for open burning) that are not less than 15 feet
(4,572 mm) from a structure.
               2.   The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25
feet (7,620 mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and
2 feet (610 mm) or less in height.
            (a)   307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50
feet (15,240 mm) of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is
contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread
within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.
            (b)   307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be
conducted within 25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7,620 mm) of a
structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
            (c)   307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor
fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and
shall not be operated within 15 feet (3,048 mm) of a structure or combustible
material.
Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two- family dwellings,
while still being used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, may
operate within less than 15 feet of a structure or combustible material.
         (5)    307.5 Attendance. All open burning fires shall be constantly
attended until the fire is extinguished.  A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher complying with paragraph (F)(906) of rule 1301:7- 7-09 of the
Administrative Code with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water
truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
      (32)   OFC Section 320 is amended by the addition thereto of Section
320.8 Exception to read as follows:
320.8 Exception. A Mobile Food Unit (commonly known as a “food truck”) that has
been inspected by and has been issued a license by the Clark County Combined
Health District may operate within the City; provided that the inspection
complied with the following:
320.8.1 Inspection.  During the said health inspection, the inspector conducted
a fire safety checklist inspection to determine whether the Mobil Food Unit
complies with Sections 320.1 through 320.7 of the OFC.
320.8.2 Failed Inspection.  If the Mobile Food Unit does not pass the Section
320.8.1 fire safety checklist inspection, the inspector may:
         (a)   Refuse to authorize the Mobile Food Unit to operate in the City,
and/or
         (b)   Call for the Fire Official, or his designee, to report to the
scene to conduct an additional inspection to determine if the Mobile Food Unit
complies with the OFC.
(Ord. 13-15. Passed 1-22-13; Ord. 19-44. Passed 2-12-19.)
 
1501.02  OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of any building, structure or premise shall be responsible for the
safe and proper maintenance of same.  In all new and existing buildings and
structures the fire protection equipment, means of egress, fire protective
signaling systems, automatic fire detection systems and safeguards required by
this Fire Prevention Code and other applicable City ordinances shall be
maintained in a safe and proper operating condition.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1501.03  OCCUPANT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   Whenever an occupant of a building creates or permits a condition in
violation of this Fire Prevention Code, by virtue of storage, handling, use or
misuse of substances, materials, devices or appliances, he shall be responsible
for the abatement of such condition, however, such occupants failure to do so
shall not relieve the owner of such building of his responsibilities under
Section
1501.02.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1501.04  MILITARY TRANSPORTS.
   The provisions contained in this Fire Prevention Code shall not be construed
as applying to the transportation of any article or substance shipped under the
jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the
military forces of the United States.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1501.05  INTERPRETATION UPON CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this Fire Prevention Code shall be construed, interpreted or
applied to abrogate, nullify or abolish any ordinance or code adopted by the
City of Springfield governing the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and
structures specifically provided herein.  When any provision of this Code is
found to be in conflict with any building, zoning, safety, health or other
applicable ordinance or code of the City of Springfield, existing on the
effective date of this Fire Prevention Code or hereafter adopted, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
safety and welfare of the public shall prevail.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1503
Administration and Enforcement
 
1503.01   Definitions.
1503.02   Terms not defined.
1503.03   Fire Marshal’s Bureau.
1503.04   Inspections.
1503.05   Cooperation of other officials.
1503.06   Right of entry.
1503.07   Investigation of fires.
1503.08   Annual report.
1503.09   Administrative liability.
1503.10   Rules and regulations.
1503.11   Appeals.
1503.12   Dangerous or hazardous conditions.
1503.13   Evacuation.
1503.14   Issuance of citation; exceptions; enforcement; prohibition.
1503.15   Abatement by City; collection of expense.
1503.99   Penalty.
 
1503.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Fire Prevention Code, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Fire Official" means the Chief of the Fire Division of the City of
Springfield, and such members of the Fire Division including, but not limited
to, members of the Fire Marshal's Bureau as the Chief may designate and who
have been issued a certificate by the State Superintendent of Public
Instruction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3303.07 evidencing his satisfactory
completion of a fire safety inspector training program.
   (b)   "Jurisdiction" means the City of Springfield, Ohio.
   (c)   "Building Code" means Part Thirteen of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of Springfield.
      (Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
1503.02  TERMS NOT DEFINED.
   (a)   Where terms are not defined in this Fire Prevention Code and are
defined in the Building Code, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
the Building Code.
 
   (b)   Where terms are not defined in this Fire Prevention Code or in the
Building Code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such as the context hereby may imply.
 
   (c)   The term "Fire Official" and "Code Official" shall have the same
definition and meaning as used throughout in this Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.03  FIRE MARSHAL'S BUREAU.
   (a)   There shall be a Fire Marshal's Bureau in the Fire Division of the
City of Springfield, Ohio, which Bureau shall be operated under the supervision
and control of the Fire Division Chief and shall have as its principal
responsibility the enforcement of this Fire Prevention Code and those
provisions of the Building Code pertaining to fire protection.
 
   (b)   The Fire Division Chief, with the approval of the City Manager, may
assign such personnel as he and the City Manager may deem necessary to the
Bureau.  Such personnel so assigned shall be known as Fire Marshal, Assistant
Fire Marshal and Inspectors.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.04  INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Official shall inspect all buildings, structures and premises
except one, two and three-family dwellings as often as may be necessary for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected, any conditions liable to
cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with fire fighting
operations, endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of this
Fire Prevention Code or any other ordinance affecting fire safety.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.05  COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Fire Official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary,
in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the officials
of all other departments of the City of Springfield.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.06  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code, or whenever the Fire Official has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises, any
condition which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, the Fire
Official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times
to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Fire Official by
this Fire Prevention Code; provided that if such building, structure or
premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request
entry.  If such entry is refused, the Fire Official shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.07  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.
   (a)   The Fire Official shall investigate, or cause to be investigated,
every fire or explosion occurring within the jurisdiction that is of a
suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or
causes destruction or damage to property.  Such investigation shall be
initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it
appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the Fire Official
shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, and in order to
preserve any physical evidence relating to the cause or origin of such fire or
explosion, take means to prevent access by any person or persons to such
building, structure or premises until such evidence has been properly
processed.  The Fire Official shall notify such persons designated by law to
pursue investigations into such matters and shall further cooperate with such
authorities in the collection of evidence and prosecution of the case and shall
pursue the investigation to its conclusion.
 
   (b)   Any member of the Fire Division of the City who is the Fire Official
who has been delegated authority by the Fire Chief to investigate fires shall
have the power and duty to investigate the cause of all fires, examine
witnesses, compel the attendance of witnesses, and the production of books and
papers, enter, for the purpose of examination, any building which, in his
opinion, is in danger of fire, and to do and perform all other acts necessary
to the effective discharge of such duties.
 
   (c)   Any member of the Fire Division of the City who is a Fire Official, a
Notary Public, who has been awarded a certificate by the executive director of
the Ohio peace officer training commission attesting to the person’s
satisfactory completion of an approved state, county, municipal, or department
of natural resources peace officer basic training program and who has been
delegated authority by the Fire Chief to investigate fires may compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, administer
oaths, make arrests, bear firearms, and enter, for the purpose of examination,
any building which, in his opinion, is in danger from fire.
 
   (d)   Any person ordered by a Fire Official, empowered under divisions (b)
or (c) of this section, to appear and give testimony or to produce books and
papers shall appear at the time and place designated in such order and shall
give testimony and produce books and records in compliance with the order
issued by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 06-303, passed 8-8-06; Ord. 13-15, passed 1-22-13.)
 
1503.08  ANNUAL REPORT.
   A report of the Fire Marshal's Bureau shall be made annually and submitted
to the City Manager.  Such report shall contain all proceedings under the Fire
Prevention Code, with such statistics as the Fire Official may wish to include
therein.  The Fire Official shall also recommend any amendments to this Fire
Prevention Code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.09  ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
   No officer, agent or employee of the City of Springfield, shall render
himself personally liable for any injury or damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this Fire Prevention Code or by reason of any failure to act
in connection therewith.  No such officer, agent or employee shall be liable
for the costs of any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code, and any suit
instituted against any such officer, agent or employee as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Fire Prevention
Code shall be defended by the Director of Law until the final determination of
the proceedings therein.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.10  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Fire Official shall have authority as may be necessary in the interest
of public safety, health and general welfare to promulgate rules and
regulations, to interpret and implement the provisions of this Fire Prevention
Code, to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements, applicable
because of climatic or other conditions, but no such rules shall have the
effect of waiving any fire safety requirements specifically provided in this
Fire Prevention Code, or violating accepted engineering practice involving
public safety.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.11  APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Fire Official in
accordance with this Fire Prevention Code, or any order or citation issued by
the Fire Official pursuant to this Fire Prevention Code may appeal in writing
to the Board of Building Appeals within ten (10) days following receipt of such
decision or service of such order or citation as provided by this Fire
Prevention Code. In requesting an appeal, such person or his attorney shall
specify the basis for such appeal and the relief sought to be obtained
therefrom. The Board of Building Appeals shall schedule a hearing on such
appeal within a reasonable time and shall notify such person or his attorney at
least seven (7) days in advance of the time and place of such hearing. At such
hearing, the Board of Building Appeals shall receive any relevant evidence that
such person, his attorney, the Fire Official, and any other person who, in the
discretion of the Board of Building Appeals, has an interest in or knowledge of
the subject matter of the hearing, may offer. Testimony received at such
hearing shall be under oath and shall be reduced to writing unless otherwise
dispensed with by such person or his attorney. The Board of Building Appeals
may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting such hearing.
Following such appeal, the Board of Building Appeals shall affirm, modify, or
dismiss the decision, order, or citation of the Fire Official.
 
   (b)   Each application for an appeal to the Board of Building Appeals from
an action of the Fire Official shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00).  Fees shall be deposited in accordance with applicable laws
and shall be used to defray the normal expenses of the appeal.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.12  DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Whenever, upon inspection or investigation, the Fire Official finds in
any building or structure or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous
conditions or materials, as follows, he shall order such dangerous condition to
be removed or remedied in accordance with the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code:
      (1)   Dangerous conditions which are liable to cause or contribute to the
spread of fire in or on such premises, building or structure or endanger the
occupants thereof;
      (2)   Conditions which would interfere with the efficiency and use of any
fire protection equipment;
      (3)   Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, liable to interfere with the egress of occupants or the operations of
the Fire Division in case of fire;
      (4)   Accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning or
ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts;
      (5)   Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil,
grease or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment;
      (6)   Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings, or other
combustible materials, or excessive storage of any combustible material;
      (7)   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or
installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances;
      (8)   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous
materials;
      (9)   Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials; and
      (10)   All equipment, materials, processes or operations which are in
violation of the provisions and intent of this Fire Prevention Code.
         (Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.13  EVACUATION.
   (a)   When, in the opinion of the Fire Official, there is a present danger
to the occupants or those in the proximity of any building, structure or
premises because of unsafe structural conditions, or inadequacy of any means of
egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence
of toxic fumes, gases or materials, the Fire Official may order the immediate
evacuation of such building, structure or premises.  All of the occupants so
notified shall immediately leave the building, structure or premises and
persons shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the Fire
Official.
 
   (b)   Any person who refuses to leave, interferes with the evacuation of
other occupants, or continues any operation after having been given an
evacuation order except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this Fire
Prevention Code.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.14  ISSUANCE OF CITATION; EXCEPTIONS; ENFORCEMENT; PROHIBITION.
   (a)   Except as herein provided, whenever the Fire Official finds that this
Fire Prevention Code, or any order issued pursuant to it has been violated, he
shall with reasonable promptness issue a citation to the persons responsible
for such violation.  Each citation shall be in writing and shall describe with
particularity the nature of the violation, including a reference to the order
or provision of this Fire Prevention Code alleged to have been violated.  In
addition, the citation shall fix a reasonable time for the abatement of the
violation.  Such citation shall be served upon the persons responsible for the
violation either by personal delivery or by delivering a copy of same to such
persons by certified mail to such persons last known post office address, or,
if service is unable to be made by personal delivery or by certified mail,
service shall be effected by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of Springfield.
 
   (b)   Whenever a citation is not complied with within the time fixed in such
citation, the Fire Official shall request the Director of Law to institute the
appropriate legal proceeding to abate such violation.
 
   (c)  No person shall knowingly fail to abate any violation cited by the Fire
Official within the time fixed for such abatement in the citation.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.15  ABATEMENT BY CITY; COLLECTION OF EXPENSE.
   If a citation is not complied with within the time fixed in such citation,
the City Manager may cause the building or structure to be repaired or
demolished, or may cause dangerous or hazardous materials or conditions to be
removed or remedied, as necessary to abate the violation, at the expense of the
persons responsible for such violation.  At least thirty (30) days prior to the
repairing or demolition of such building or structure, or the removal or
remedying of such materials or conditions, the City Manager shall give or cause
to be given notice by certified mail of his intention with respect to such
building or structure to the holders of liens of record upon the real property
on which such building or structure is located and to the owners of record of
such property. The holders of liens of record upon such property may enter into
an agreement with the City to perform the repair, demolition, removal or other
remedial action.  If an emergency exists, as determined by the City Manager,
notice may be given other than by certified mail and less than thirty (30) days
prior to such repair, demolition, removal or other remedial action.  If the
persons responsible for such violation fail, neglect or refuse to pay the
expenses incurred in the repairing or demolition of such building or structure,
or the removal or remedying of such materials or conditions, the City Manager
shall, with the assistance of the Director of Law, cause the expense incurred
in the repairing or demolition of such building or structure, or the removal or
remedying of such materials or conditions, to be charged against the land on
which such building or structure is or was situated as a municipal lien or
cause such expense to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be
levied as a special tax against the land on which the building or structure is
or was situated, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the persons
responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1503.99  PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided, whoever knowingly violates any provision of
this Fire Prevention Code, or any order or citation issued pursuant to it, is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000) or be imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or
both.  Each day that a violation continues, after service of notice as provided
in this Fire Prevention Code, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1507
Special Provisions
 
1507.01   Yard systems.
1507.02   Fire suppression equipment.
1507.03   Residential fire protection.
1507.04   Fire safety plan; high rise buildings.
1507.05   Outside storage.
1507.06   Fire lanes.
1507.07   Fire-damaged structures.
1507.08   Fire hydrant and water main systems for fire protection.
1507.09   Fire Division access.
1507.10   Hazardous material information.
 
1507.01  YARD SYSTEMS.
   All new and existing oil storage plants, lumber yards, amusement or
exhibition parks, and educational or institutional buildings and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire, or life hazards, and which are
located more than 300 feet from a public fire hydrant or which require
quantities of water beyond the fire suppression capabilities of the City's
water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire
hydrants.  Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as
required by the Fire Official and shall be connected to a water system in
accordance with the accepted engineering practice standards listed in this Fire
Prevention Code .  The Fire Official shall designate and approve the number and
location of such fire hydrants.  Such fire hydrants shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.02  FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall damage, obstruct, obscure from view, remove, tamper
with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant, fire department connection, or fire
protection system or equipment required to be installed or maintained under the
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code or Building Code except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making
necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Official.  Whenever a fire
protection system or equipment is removed as herein permitted, it shall be
replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has
been accomplished.  Defective and nonapproved fire protection systems or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as ordered by the Fire Official.
 
   (b)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection
system or equipment which does not meet the minimum standards for such system
or equipment as specified in this Fire Prevention Code.
 
   (c)   No person shall service, test, repair or install for profit any fire
protection or fire fighting equipment without first being certified by the Ohio
Fire Marshal, as required by Ohio R.C. 3737.65.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.03  RESIDENTIAL FIRE PROTECTION.
   (a)   All one, two and three-family dwellings and all dwelling units in any
residential building constructed after the effective date of this Fire
Prevention Code shall be equipped with one or more approved smoke detector
devices installed in a manner and location in accordance with The Residential
Code For One, Two-and Three-Family Dwellings as adopted in Springfield Codified
Ordinances
Part 13.
 
   (b)   Whenever the structural parts of a one, two or three-family dwelling
are altered or improved in an amount in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000)
in value, such dwelling shall be equipped with one or more approved smoke
detector devices installed in a manner and location in accordance with The
Residential Code For One, Two-and Three-Family Dwellings as adopted in
Springfield Codified Ordinances
Part 13.
 
   (c)   All one, two and three-family dwellings occupied after the effective
date of this Fire Prevention Code by any handicapped person shall be equipped
with one or more approved smoke detector devices  installed in a manner and
location in accordance with The Residential Code For One, Two-and Three-Family
Dwellings as adopted in Springfield Codified Ordinances
Part 13.  The term "handicapped person" means any individual whose ability to
protect himself in the event of a fire is significantly limited by reason of
illness, injury, age, congenital malfunction, or other permanent incapacity or
disability, and whose vulnerability to the hazards of fire is appreciably
greater than persons not so affected.
 
   (d)   All buildings constructed or converted for use after the effective
date of this Fire Prevention Code as a hotel, motel, lodging house, boarding
house or dormitory building arranged for the shelter and sleeping accommodation
of more than twenty (20) persons shall have an approved automatic fire
suppression system installed therein.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.04  FIRE SAFETY PLAN; HIGH RISE BUILDINGS.
   (a)   The owner or other person having charge of buildings identified as
high rise buildings in the Building Code shall be required to prepare and
submit for the review and approval of the Fire Official a fire safety plan and
evacuation procedure as set forth in this section.
 
   (b)   A fire safety plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements of
the Fire Official, shall be distributed to the tenants and building service
employees.  Tenants shall distribute to their employees applicable parts of the
fire safety plan which affect their action in the event of a fire or emergency.
 
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to promptly
update the fire safety plan and evacuation procedures upon changes in
occupancy, use or physical arrangement.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.05  OUTSIDE STORAGE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter
1501 of the Codified Ordinances, the outside storage of combustible or
flammable materials shall be enclosed by chain link fencing at least six (6)
feet in height.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.06  FIRE LANES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of
1501 of the Codified Ordinances, additional requirements regarding fire lanes
are set out in the following sections.
   (a)   Extent.  Fire lanes shall be required by the Fire Official to extend
on any or all sides of a building's perimeter where necessary for fire fighting
access.
   (b)   Turning Radius.  Turning radius within fire lanes shall be a minimum
of forty-five (45) feet turning path.  "Turning path" means that area which
includes the outer front overhang and the inner rear wheel of the fire
apparatus.
   (c)   Special Equipment.  The Fire Official shall require when necessary a
larger turning path for other typical fire apparatus of the jurisdiction.
   (d)   Signs.  Fire lanes shall be posted at a maximum of every seventy-five
(75) feet with an approved sign capable of being seen from the direction of
travel.
   (e)   Sign Installation.  The property owner, or any agent shall furnish,
install and maintain all signs required to properly designate the fire lanes
required by this Fire Prevention Code.
   (f)   Site Plan.  The property owner, or any agent, shall provide a scaled
site plan of the premises for the Fire Official to visually illustrate
designated fire lanes.
   (g)   Special Areas.  The Fire Official may, upon written request from the
property owner or any agent, designate certain loading/unloading areas within
the fire lanes.  These loading/unloading shall be designated for reasons such
as the movement of merchandise or materials to stores within the fire lane
area, the loading or discharging of passengers from a means of public mass
transit, or the movement of handicapped persons.
   (h)   Obstructions.  The obstructing, parking, standing, stopping or any
cessation of motion of a vehicle or object, irrespective of whether such
vehicle is occupied or not and irrespective of the duration of time, within a
designated fire lane, is prohibited except where lawfully permitted, or by a
public safety vehicle on an emergency basis.
      (Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.07  FIRE-DAMAGED STRUCTURES.
   Any building, grounds or structure that has been damaged by fire, shall be
secured from tampering or trespass and maintained in a nuisance free condition
by the owner or his agent, in a manner acceptable to the Fire Official.  All
fire debris shall be removed from the outside of the property within fifteen
(15) days after being damaged by the fire or explosion.  All structures damaged
by fire or explosion shall have repairs begun, demolished or torn down, within
ninety (90) days after being damaged by fire or explosion.  An exception shall
be for structures involved in suspicious or arson fires which are deemed as
evidence by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.08  FIRE HYDRANT AND WATER MAIN SYSTEMS FOR FIRE PROTECTION.
   (a)   General.  Where a public water supply is within a reasonable distance
of a property or area being built upon, or where a structure is being
constructed, added to or remodeled to the extent that a fire flow is required,
or where a change in occupancy or use will result in a greater hazard
classification requiring an increase in available water for fire protection,
the owner or developer shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
Fire Prevention Code.
 
   (b)   Water Mains.  All water mains shall besized a minimum of eight inches
in diameter as well as to meet usage and fire flow demands unless otherwise
specified as follows:
      (1)   Lines may be required to be larger than eight inch if identified in
the City's master water or facilities plan.  Lines may also be required to be
larger if an identified need can be documented based on flow or pressure
deficiencies or if the City desires to enter into an oversize agreement.
      (2)   If a line segment is to be installed that completes a loop, grid,
or extends lines of uniform size and no current deficiencies for pressure or
flow can be identified, a like diameter pipe size will be installed.
      (3)   Should it be determined by the Service Department that inadequate
cycling of the water would occur, thus resulting in noncomformance with water
quality standards and regulations, alternative line sizing and connection
configurations will be identified by the City Engineer.  The City Engineer
shall cooperate with the Fire Official in determining the main size to ensure
adequate fire flow demands.
      (4)   Waterlines in one- and two-family residential subdivisions may be
six-inch diameter if interconnected and looped in segments unless a segment of
a main functions as a transmission or supply main through the subdivision.
 
   (c)   All water distribution systems in a subdivision shall be designed with
looping for proper water flow.  Dead end lines shall be approved by the City
Engineer, after consultation with the Fire Official, only if the developer can
show no feasible means to loop the lines.
 
   (d)   Adequacy.  Where an area or property is being developed or built upon,
and such area or property is being served by water mains not meeting the
minimum requirements of this standard, the Fire Official may permit connection
to such water mains if it is demonstrated that the available water for fire
protection from those water mains is adequate to protect the properties being
served, except that, in no case shall a water main less than six (6) inches in
diameter be considered acceptable.
 
   (e)   Fire Hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be installed as designated by the
Fire Official based on the following guidelines:
      (1)   Installed along public and/or private water mains at distances no
greater than 400 feet apart, as measured along the main, except in areas of
one- and two-family residential buildings.  Such distances shall be no greater
than 500 feet.  All fire hydrants shall be placed on lot lines.
      (2)   Installed at the end of six-inch lines or greater.
      (3)   Installed at street corners ten foot from end of radius.
      (4)   Installed as required for maintenance and operational purposes.
      (5)   All cul-de-sacs shall have a fire hydrant at the end for fire flow
demands.
      (6)   Fire hydrants shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of
all building access points as designated by the Fire Official, and shall be
measured along actual fire apparatus routes of travel.
 
   (f)   Hydrant Location and Setback.  Fire apparatus and equipment shall be
provided safe, unconstrained access to all fire hydrants as determined by the
Fire Official.  No natural or man-made barriers such as walls, fences, posts,
curbs, shrubbery or trees shall be installed or maintained so as to impede the
use or operation of a fire hydrant.  Exact fire hydrant locations shall be as
detailed by the Fire Official.
 
   (g)   Private Fire Hydrants.  All fire hydrants not part of a private yard
system, shall meet the Service Department specifications and shall have at
least two (2), two and one-half (2-1/2) inch hose nozzles, and one four (4)
inch steamer type nozzle.  All nozzles shall have threads conforming to the
Springfield Fire Division thread specifications.  Fire hydrants shall be
installed as designated by the Fire Official.  Fire hydrant colors shall be
designated by the Fire Official.
 
   (h)   Option.  When fire hydrants are required by the Fire Official, the
owner of the property, or his agent, shall have the option of installing a
hydrant or hydrants as required by subsection (e) hereof or may install a
single barrel hydrant with only the steamer nozzle conforming with the
requirements of subsection (g) hereof, subject to the approval of the Fire
Official.
 
   (i)   Hydrant Height.  Fire hydrant height shall be at least twelve (12)
inches, but no more than twenty-one (21) inches above the surrounding finished
grade of the hydrant.  Such measurements shall be made from the bottom of the
lowest nozzle on the hydrant barrel.  Break type fire hydrants shall have such
feature installed as close as practical, or to serve such purpose, to the
surrounding finished grade.
 
   (j)   Hydrant Protection.  In areas subject to vehicular traffic where fire
hydrants are located, such hydrants, when deemed necessary by the Fire
Official, shall have collision protection installed; the extent and type of
such protection shall be acceptable to the Fire Official.
 
   (k)   Hydrant Service.  A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed
from service unless such condition is reported to the Fire Official.
 
   (l)   Hydrant Damage.  Any person who damages, witnesses damage to, or has
knowledge of damage to a fire hydrant shall report same to the Fire Official or
the Service Department.
 
   (m)   Tampering.  No person, not duly authorized in writing, shall knowingly
move, deface, paint, damage, destroy or otherwise unlawfully tamper with any
fire hydrant, valve, plug, or other fixture or facility of the public water
supply unless authorized in writing by the Fire Official or Service Department.
 
   (n)   Obstructing Prohibited.  No person shall obscure from view, obstruct,
block or restrict the use or access to any fire hydrant.  Such obstruction,
blockage or restriction shall be considered a violation of this section.
 
   (o)   Fire Suppression Support.  In those buildings or structures where
automatic fire suppression is provided throughout, the number and location of
fire hydrants may be reduced or altered by the Fire Official.
 
   (p)   Suppression System Hydrant.  A fire hydrant meeting the specifications
and installed according to this section and connected to a public water supply,
shall be installed at a location designated by the Fire Official that is within
seventy-five (75) feet of a suppression system Fire Department connection, but
no closer than forty (40) feet to the building or structure, except as modified
in subsection (o) hereof.
 
   (q)   Fire Suppression Equipment.  No person shall damage, obstruct, obscure
from view, remove, tamper with, or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant, Fire
Department connection, or fire protection system or equipment required to be
installed or maintained under the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code or
Building Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing
purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the
Fire Official.  Whenever a fire protection system or equipment is removed as
herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose
for which it was removed has been accomplished.  Defective and nonapproved fire
protection systems or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as ordered by the
Fire Official.
 
   (r)   All water mains and water services shall have a minimum of 48-inches
of cover.
 
   (s)   Fire Hydrant Colors.  All public, private, and/or yard fire hydrants
shall be painted colors as designated by the Fire Official.  All caps on all
fire hydrants all be painted as designated by the Fire Official to indicate the
amount of water flow available from said hydrant.
 
   (t)   Fire Hydrant Flows and Flushing. 
      (1)   All public, private, and/or yard fire hydrants shall be flowed and/
or flushed to determine the adequacy of water availability and fire flows on a
regular basis and as determined by the Fire Official. 
      (2)   Every owner of a privately-owned fire hydrant or of a yard hydrant
shall maintain his applicable hydrant(s) in good operating order at all times. 
      (3)   Members of the City's Fire Division or of the City's Service
Department may enter onto private property at any time for the purpose of
performing flow and/or flushing functions on a private fire hydrant or a yard
hydrant. 
      (4)    The City shall not be liable for any damage or harm occurring in
connection with performing flow and/or flushing functions on a private and/or
yard fire hydrant when the damage or harm is proximately caused by failure of
the private and/or yard fire hydrant to be in good operating order. 
         (Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06; Ord. 19-44. Passed 2-12-19.)
 
1507.09  FIRE DIVISION ACCESS.
   (a)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all premises
which the Fire Division may be called upon to protect.  Suitable gates, access
roads and fire lanes shall be provided so that all buildings on the premises
are accessible to emergency vehicles.
 
   (b)   Restricted Access.  When access to or within a structure or an area is
unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is
necessary for lifesaving or fire fighting purposes, the Fire Official may
require a key box to be installed in an accessible location.  The key box shall
be of a type approved by the Fire Official and shall contain keys to gain
necessary access as required by the Fire Official.
 
   (c)   Automatic Alarms.  When an area is protected by an automatic fire
alarm, the Fire Official may require a key box to be installed in an accessible
location.  The key box shall be of a type approved by the Fire Official and
shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
1507.10  HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   The owner or operator of any facility which is required to prepare or
have available a "Material Safety Data Sheet" (MSDS) or an emergency and
hazardous chemical inventory from under subtitle B, Sections 311 and 312 of the
Superfund Amendments and Re-authorization Act of 1986 hereinafter referred to
as "(SARA)", or any facility where such information is deemed necessary by the
Fire Chief or his designee, shall provide and maintain the following
information at the facility site for emergency response personnel:
      (1)   A current list of key facility personnel knowledgeable about safety
procedures of materials on site, complete with current telephone numbers for
such personnel in the event of an incident after normal business hours of
facility operation.
      (2)   A current emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form as per
Section 312 SARA.
      (3)   A binder containing the MSDS required under Subtitle B, Section 311
of SARA or in the event of a volume of MSDS too great to practically keep in
the lock box or boxes, the information in the lock box or boxes shall give the
location of the on site MSDS and the MSDS shall be readily available for use by
emergency personnel.
      (4)   A site plan which shall include the following:
         A.   The location of storage and use of hazardous materials on-site.
         B.   The location of on-site emergency fire fighting and spill clean-
up equipment.
         C.   A diagram of the complete sewer system, water system, fire
hydrants and topographical information relative to the facility.
 
   (b)   Lock Boxes.  The information required in subsection (a) hereof shall
be maintained in an approved lock box or boxes at a location or locations
approved by the Fire Official.  All information required by this chapter shall
be maintained in current order in accordance with this chapter and Sections 311
and 312 of Subtitle B of SARA.
 
   (c)   Lock Box Specifications.  All lock boxes as required by subsection (b)
hereof shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) inches x eighteen (18) inches x five
(5) inches and constructed of one-eighth (1/8) inch plate steel with an
additional one-fourth (1/4) inch steel front plate or equivalent.  All lock
boxes required shall be equipped with a high security Medeco Level three (3)
lock or equivalent.
 
   (d)   Lock Box Alternative.  When the information required by subsection (a)
hereof is too great for a lock box or boxes an alternative method for making
the information available shall be permitted.  The information may be kept in a
locked file cabinet or cabinets in a location protected from vandalism and
fire, in an area remote from where the hazardous materials are stored, handled
or processed.  The alternative method and location shall be acceptable to, and
approval by, the Fire Official.  When this method is used to provide the
required information keys to the building, area within the building where the
cabinet or cabinets are, and the file cabinet or cabinets shall be kept in a
lock box as required by subsection (b) hereof.
 
   (e)   Identification of Lock Box or Boxes and/or Alternative.  The location
of all lock boxes or alternative filing cabinets required by this section shall
be clearly identified by a highly visible three (3) inch reflective federal
safety yellow diagonal stripe across the "Box or Cabinet".
 
   (f)   Large Facilities.  For larger facilities or facilities with multiple
buildings, the Fire Chief or his designee shall designate the number and
location of the lock boxes.
(Ord. 06-303.  Passed 8-8-06.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1511
Open Burning
 
1511.01   Definitions.
1511.02   Relations to other prohibitions; conflict.
1511.03   Open burning in restricted areas.
1511.04   Permission and notice to open burn.
1511.05   Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires.
1511.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
See sectional histories for similar State law
Air pollution control--see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3704
Permit to burn construction debris--see Ohio R.C. 3704.11(C)
Spreading fire through negligence--see Ohio R.C. 3737.62
Open burning--see OAC Ch. 3745
 
1511.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in Chapter 3745-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code and this chapter:
   (a)   "Agricultural waste" means any matter generated by crop, horticultural
or livestock production practices, and includes such items as bags, cartons,
structural materials and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural
activities, but does not include land clearing waste; buildings; garbage; dead
animals; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor economic poisons and containers
therefor, unless the manufacturer has identified open burning as a safe
disposal procedure.
   (b)   "Economic poisons" include but are not restricted to pesticides such
as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
   (c)   "Garbage" means any matter resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
   (d)   "Landscape waste" means any plant matter, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.
   (e)   "Land clearing waste" means plant matter which is removed from land,
including plant matter removed from stream banks during projects involving more
than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land useful for
residential, commercial or industrial development.
   (f)   "Ohio EPA" means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by such Director pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3704.03 or
the Chief of any Ohio Environmental Protection Agency district office.
   (g)   "Open burning" means the burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney.  Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of Ohio Administrative
Code 3745-17-09 or 3745-17-10.
   (h)   "Residential waste" means any matter, including landscape wastes,
generated on a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result of residential
activities, but not including garbage.
   (i)   "Restricted area" means the area within the boundary of any municipal
corporation established in accordance with the provisions of Title 7 of the
Ohio Revised Code, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of
any such municipal corporation having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons
and a zone extending one mile beyond any such municipal corporation having a
population of 10,000 persons or more according to the latest federal census.
   (j)   "Unrestricted area" means all areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in subsection (i) hereof.
      (OAC 3745-19-01)
 
1511.02  RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS; CONFLICT.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision in Ohio Administrative Code Chapter
3745-19, no open burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert,
warning or emergency under Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-25 is in
effect.
 
   (b)   No provisions of Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19, permitting
open burning, and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall
exempt any person from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
any regulation of any State department, or any local ordinance or regulation
dealing with open burning.
(OAC 3745-19-02)
 
   (c)   In case of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall control over
Section F-301.0 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code adopted in Section
1507.01(a).
 
1511.03  OPEN BURNING IN RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (a)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in subsections (b) to (d) hereof or in Ohio
R.C. 3704.11.
 
   (b)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
      (1)   Cooking for human consumption;
      (2)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
Fires allowed by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) hereof shall not be used for
waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum size sufficient for their
intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and
emission of air contaminants.
   (c)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA:
      (1)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal
verification to the Ohio EPA from the local health department, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
      (2)   Ceremonial fires provided the following conditions are met:
         A.   The ceremonial fires shall be less than five feet by five feet in
dimension and shall burn no longer than three hours;
         B.   The ceremonial fires shall not be used for waste disposal
purposes; and
         C.   The fuel shall be chosen so as to minimize the generation and
emission of air contaminants.
 
   (d)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt
of written permission from the Ohio EPA provided that any conditions specified
in the permission are followed:
      (1)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal;
      (2)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires;
      (3)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Ohio EPA; and
      (4)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, range or wildlife
management practices.
         (OAC 3745-19-03)
 
1511.04  PERMISSION AND NOTICE TO OPEN BURN.
   (a)   Permission.
      (1)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing at least ten days before the fire is to be set.  It shall be in such
form and contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Such applications shall contain, as a minimum, information
regarding:
         A.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         B.   The nature and quantities of material to be burned;
         C.   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
         D.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
         E.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
      (3)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants; and will have no serious detrimental
effect upon adjacent properties or the occupants thereof.  The Ohio EPA may
impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of Ohio
Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19.
      (4)   Permission to open burn shall be obtained for each specific
project.  In emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be
seriously threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may
be set with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
      (5)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
 
   (b)   Notification.
      (1)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten days before
the fire is to be set.  It shall be in such form and contain such information
as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding:
         A.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         B.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
         C.   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
         D.   The location of the burning site.
      (3)   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the
open burning is not allowed under Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19 and
the Ohio EPA shall notify the applicant to this effect.
         (OAC 3745-19-05)
 
1511.05  BONFIRES AND OUTDOOR RUBBISH FIRES.
   (a)   General.  Burning of rubbish shall be prohibited except in approved
incinerators.  Bonfires may be permitted only under the following conditions
and subject to the air pollution provisions of this chapter.
 
   (b)   Permit Required.  A person shall not kindle or maintain any bonfire or
authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any premises without
having obtained a permit or other proper authorization from the Fire Official. 
All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of the land upon
which the bonfire is to be kindled.
 
   (c)   Location Restricted.  A person shall not kindle or maintain any
bonfire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained unless:
      (1)   The location is approved by the Fire Official and is not less than
fifty feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire
from spreading to within fifty feet of any structure; or
      (2)   The fire is contained in an approved burner located safely not less
than fifteen feet from any structure.
 
   (d)   Bonfire Material.  Fuel for bonfires shall consist of seasoned dry
wood only and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper only.  Bonfires
shall not contain any rubbish, garbage, trash, any material made of or coated
with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based materials and shall not
contain any flammable or combustible liquids.  The allowable quantity of wood
to be burnt shall be determined by the Fire Official and shall be based upon
the fire safety requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of
burn.
 
   (e)   Attendance at Open Fires.  Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a
competent person until such fire is extinguished.  This person shall have fire
extinguishing equipment readily available for use as deemed necessary by the
Fire Official.
 
   (f)   Prohibited Bonfires.  The Fire Official may prohibit any or all
bonfires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fire
hazardous or which are or could be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or
odor emissions.  The Fire Official shall order the extinguishment, by the
permit holder or the Fire Division, of any bonfire which creates or adds to a
hazardous or objectionable situation.
(OAC 1301:7-7-03.)
 
1511.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty days, or both.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1513
Fireworks
 
1513.01   Definitions.
1513.02   Public exhibition permit required; fee; bond; records.
1513.03   Unlawful conduct by exhibitor.
1513.04   Possession, sale or discharge prohibited; exceptions.
1513.05   Application.
1513.06     Conflict.
1513.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Manufacturers to comply with building and zoning ordinances - see Ohio R.C.
3743.06(F)
Wholesalers to comply with building and zoning ordinances – see Ohio R.C.
3743.19(G)
Arrests, seizure of fireworks by certified fire safety inspector - see Ohio
R.C. 3743.68
Conflict of Fire Marshal's rules with rules of Ohio Board of Building
Standards- see Ohio R.C. 3781.11(0)
 
1513.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)    "Beer" and "intoxicating liquor" have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 4301.01.
   (b)    "Booby trap" means a small tube that has a string protruding from
both ends, that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by
pulling the ends of the string.
   (c)    "Cigarette load" means a small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
   (d)    "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (e)    "Fireworks" means any composition or device prepared for the purpose
of  producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation,  except ordinary matches and except as provided in Section
1513.05.
   (f)    "Licensed exhibitor of fireworks" or "licensed exhibitor" means a
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 to 3743.55.
   (g)    "Licensed manufacturer of fireworks" or "licensed manufacturer" means
a person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 to 3743.08.
   (h)    "Licensed wholesaler of fireworks" or "licensed wholesaler" means a
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 to 3743.21.
   (i)    "Novelties and trick noisemakers" include the following items:
      (1)    Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user,
including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers and
snappers;
      (2)    Snakes or glow worms;
      (3)    Smoke devices;
      (4)    Trick matches.
   (j)    "Party popper" means a small plastic or paper item that contains not
more than sixteen milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition, that
is ignited by pulling string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.
   (k)    "Railroad" means any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
   (1)    "Smoke device" means a tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
   (m)    "Snake or glow worm" means a device that consists of a pressed pellet
of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
   (n)    "Snapper" means a small, paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand, and that, when
dropped, implodes.
   (o)    "Trick match" means a kitchen or book match that is coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a
small report or a shower of sparks.
      (ORC 3743.01)
 
1513.02  PUBLIC EXHIBITION PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; BOND; RECORDS.
   (a)    A licensed exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks  exhibition within the City of Springfield shall apply for approval
to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief and the Police Chief.
   The required approval shall be evidenced by the Fire Chief or Fire Official
and the Police Chief signing a permit for the exhibition, the form for which
shall be prescribed by the State Fire Marshal. Any exhibitor of fireworks who
wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form
from the Fire Marshal or, if it is available, from the Fire Chief, Fire
Official or Police Chief.
 
   (b)    Before signing a permit and issuing it to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or Fire Official and the Police Chief shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his license as an exhibitor of fireworks to the Fire
Chief or Fire Official and the Police Chief.
   The Fire Chief or Fire Official and the Police Chief shall give their
approval to conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if they are satisfied,
based on the inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be
conducted allow the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the Fire
Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or Fire Official and the Police
Chief may inspect the premises immediately prior to the exhibition to determine
if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may revoke the permit for
noncompliance with the rules.
 
   (c)    The Fire Chief or Fire Official and the Police Chief shall not issue
a permit until the applicant pays a permit fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
plus any necessary costs of investigation of the applicant and of inspecting
the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted.
   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000) with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or Fire
Official and the Police Chief, conditioned for the payment of all final
judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury,
death or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition,
or proof of insurance coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000) for
liability arising from injury, death or loss to persons or property emanating
from the fireworks exhibition.
   The City Commission may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond
or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this
subsection. The Fire Chief or Fire Official and Police Chief shall not issue a
permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this subsection.
(Ord. 97-149. Passed 4-29-97.)
 
   (d)   (1)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief
or Fire Official and the Police Chief shall contain a distinct number, together
with a designation of the Municipality. A copy of each permit issued shall be
forwarded by the Fire Chief or Fire Official and the Police Chief issuing it to
the Fire Marshal, who shall keep a record of the permits he receives. A permit
is not transferable or assignable.
      (2)    The Fire Chief, Fire Official and Police Chief shall keep a record
of issued permits for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, Fire
Official or Police Chief shall list the name of the exhibitor, his license
number, the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and
time of the exhibition and the number of the permit issued to the exhibitor for
the exhibition.
         (ORC 3743.54)
 
1513.03  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT BY EXIDBITOR.
   (a)    No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
rules adopted by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B).
   (b)    No licensed exhibitor of fireworks sha11 conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to
Section
1513.02 or if a permit so secured is revoked by the Fire Chief or Fire Official
and Police Chief pursuant to that section.
   (c)    No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at
a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55.
   (d)    No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have in his possession or under his
control, or be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or
controlled substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being
conducted. (ORC 3743.64)
1513.04  POSSESSION. SALE OR DISCHARGE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)    No person shall possess fireworks in this Municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this Municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.15 to 3743.21,
an out-of-state resident as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.44, a resident of this
State as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks
as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743 .50 to 3743.55 and Section
1513.02 and except as provided in Section
1513.05.
 
   (b)    Except as provided in Section
1513.05 and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a
fireworks exhibition pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 to 3743.55 and Section
1513.02, no person shall discharge, ignite or explode any fireworks in this
Municipality.
 
   (c)    No person shall use in a theater or public hall, what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
 
   (d)    No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under eighteen
years of age.
 
   (e)    No person shall advertise Class C fireworks for sale. A sign located
on a seller's premises identifying him as a seller of fireworks is not the
advertising of fireworks for sale.
(ORC 3743.65)
 
1513.05  APPLICATION.
   This chapter does not prohibit or apply to the following:
   (a)    The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use in
emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation or highway use;
   (b)    The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
fuses,  torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
   (c)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals or for ceremonial purposes;
   (d)    The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or sale to the Armed Forces of the United States and the militia of this
State of pyrotechnic devices;
   (e)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
toy pistols, toy  canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing twenty-five  hundredths grains or less of explosive material
are used, provided that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into
contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the
manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
   (f)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and model
rocket motors designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable
aero models;
   (g)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
sparklers on a wire stick, as this term is defined in the regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation. (ORC 3743.80)
 
1513.06  CONFLICT.
   In the event of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall control over
Chapter 31 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code as adopted in Section
1507.01(a).
(Ord. 97-149. Passed 4-29-97.)
 
1513.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisoned not more than six months or both.
(ORC 3743.99(C))
 
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART SEVENTEEN - HEALTH CODE
 
TITLE ONE - Food and Food Products
Chap.   
1711.   Food Establishments.
Chap   
1715.   Mead and Meat Products.
Chap.   
1717.   Food Service Operations.
 
TITLE THREE - Sanitation
Chap.   
1731.   Littering.
Chap.   
1733.   Expectoration.
Chap.   
1735.   Animals.
Chap.   
1737.   Rat Control.
Chap.   
1741.   Hazardous Substances.
Chap.   
1743.   Swimming Pools.
Chap.   
1745.   Child Day Care.
 
 
 
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF SPRINGFIELD
PART SEVENTEEN - HEALTH CODE
 
TITLE ONE - Foods and Food Products
Chap.
1711.  Food Establishments.
Chap.
1715.  Meat and Meat Products.
Chap.
1717.  Food Service Operations.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1711
Food Establishments
 
1711.01   Definitions.
1711.02   Compliance procedures; permit to operate.
1711.03   Construction and maintenance of physical facilities.
1711.04   Health of employees.
1711.05   Approval of plans and equipment.
1711.06   Equipment and utensils.
1711.07   Cleaning, sanitization and storage of equipment and utensils.
1711.08   Sanitary facilities and controls.
1711.09   Plumbing.
1711.10   Food.
1711.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Food establishments - see OAC 901:3-29
Food service operations - see HLTH. Ch.
1717
 
1711.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "Food establishment" means any place whether temporary or permanent,
stationary or mobile, or whether it be considered public, semi-public or
private, where food or drink is prepared, processed, manufactured, packaged,
stored, served, sold or offered for sale.  Provided that the following places
are not included:  homes containing what is commonly known as the family unit
and their nonpaying guests; food service operations as defined in Ohio R.C.
3732.01; dairy plants, meat plants, slaughter houses, abattoirs and food-
processing and food-manufacturing establishments which are under regulatory
authority of the State and/or Federal Government.
 
   (b)   "Board of Health" means the Board of Health of the Springfield City
Health District as created by the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3709.02 and 3709.05
and Chapter
159 of the Codified Ordinances of the City.
 
   (c)   "Health Commissioner" means the person occupying the office in the
Springfield City Health District which is created by Ohio R.C. 3709.11 and
3709.14 and Chapter
137 of the Codified Ordinances of the City.
 
   (d)   "Mobile food establishment" means one which may be moved from one
location to another without significant alteration of the structure or
equipment.
 
   (e)   "Food product" means any raw, cooked or processed edible substance,
ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
 
   (f)   "Bulk food product" means processed or unprocessed food in aggregate
containers from which individual quantities are withdrawn for the consumer.
 
   (g)   "Equipment" means items other than utensils used in the storage,
preparation, display and transportation of food such as stoves, ovens, hoods,
slicers, grinders, mixers, scales, meat blocks, tables, food shelving, reach-in
refrigerators and freezers, sinks, ice makers and similar items used in the
operation of food establishments.
 
   (h)   "Utensils" means and includes any food-contact implement used in the
storage, preparation, transportation or dispensing of food and food products.
 
   (i)   "Food-contact surfaces" means those surfaces of equipment and utensils
with which food normally comes into contact, and those surfaces from which food
may drain, drip or splash back onto surfaces normally in contact with food.
 
   (j)   "Unwholesomeness" means adulteration as defined in Ohio R.C. 3715.59.
 
   (k)   "Corrosion-resistant materials" means those materials that maintain
acceptable sanitary surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the
food to be contacted, the normal use of cleaning compounds and sanitizing
solutions, and other conditions of the use environment.
 
   (l)   "Easily cleanable" means that surfaces are readily accessible and made
of material and finish and are so fabricated that residue can effectively be
removed by normal cleaning methods.
 
   (m)   "Hermetically sealed container" means that container which is designed
and intended to be secure against the entry of microorganisms and will maintain
the commercial sterility of its contents after processing.
 
   (n)   "Packaged" means bottled, canned, cartoned, bagged or securely
wrapped.
 
   (o)   "Operator" means any person, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity operating a food establishment within the jurisdiction of
the City Health District.
 
   (p)   "Potentially hazardous food" means any food that consists in whole or
in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible
crustacea or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, and which is
in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or
toxigenic microorganisms.
 
   (q)   "Permit" means that document issued by the Board of Health which
authorizes the operation of a food establishment within the jurisdiction of the
City Health District.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed  1-10-89.)
 
1711.02  COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES; PERMIT TO OPERATE.
   (a)   No person, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity
shall operate a food establishment in the Springfield City Health District
without a permit from the Board of Health.  Such permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the food establishment.
 
   (b)   Prior to conducting a food establishment operation in the City Health
District, every person, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity
shall procure a permit to operate a food establishment from the Board of Health
and shall renew the permit on or before the first day of July each year.  If a
permit fee is not received by the licensor on or before the date it is due, an
additional processing fee of twenty-five percent (25%) of any such fee shall be
imposed and paid.  However, a seasonal food establishment as determined by the
Board of Health, that operates no longer than forty-five consecutive days a
year may obtain or renew a permit at any time before it begins operation of a
food establishment during the calendar year.
 
   (c)   An annual permit fee shall be levied upon each food establishment for
the purpose of enforcing and paying the expense of inspections.  The permit fee
for a food establishment is defined as follows:
 
     Permit Description                                                               Fee
(1)  Seasonal food establishments (mobile or stationary, selling fruits and           $ 
     vegetables), operating no more than thirty consecutive days in a calendar year.  30.00
(2)  Food establishments selling pre-packaged, nonperishable food only.               30.00
(3)  Food establishments selling all prepackaged    food items, including perishabl52.50
     foods.
     Carnival and/or fair operations and roadside    stands (mobile or stationary)
(4)  operating within the City for no more than thirty consecutive days and which are 30.00
     not covered under Ohio R.C. 3732.01, selling confections as such:  cotton candy,
     snow cones, candy apples, popcorn, sugar waffles, peanuts, soft ice cream, etc.
(5)  Non-seasonal food establishments selling fruits and vegetables.                  52.50
(6)  Food establishments that package or dispense candy, peanuts, ice cream and other 52.50
     confectionery items.
(7)  Warehouses storing packaged food and/or beverages for distributing.              35.00
(8)  Wholesale fruit and produce distributors.                                        $ 
                                                                                      52.50
(9)  Food establishments of less than 2,500 square feet, selling all food items,      75.00
     including the packaging and handling of various raw food products.
(10) Food establishments of 2,500 square feet or more, selling all food items,        150.00
     including the packaging and handling of raw food products.
(11) Beverage plants and all general bakeries.                                        150.00
     Non-profit organizations, churches, schools, fraternal or veteran organizations
(12) selling products for five or more consecutive days or not more than fifty-two    7.50
     times per year.
   (d)   If an operator in one category becomes involved in the sale or
production of products from a higher category, the latter shall take
precedence.
 
   (e)   The following operations are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
      (1)   Milk-bread routes, when base of operations, where the product is
placed in the vehicle, has been certified as inspected by the Health
Department.
      (2)   Food services whose entire operation and management is regulated by
the State of Ohio or by another state.
      (3)   Non-profit organizations, churches, schools, fraternal or veteran
organizations selling products less than five consecutive days or less than
fifty-two times per year.
 
   (f)   Each food operation at separate locations or at the same location, but
leased or owned by different operators require separate permits.
 
   (g)   Suspension of permit.  The Health Commissioner or an authorized
representative may, upon written notice, without prior warning, notice, or
hearing, suspend the permit to operate a food establishment, within the
jurisdiction of the City Health District, if the operation constitutes an
imminent hazard to the public health, such as an extended loss of water supply,
adulterated foods, an extended power outage or sewage back-up into the
establishment.  When the permit is suspended, the food establishment shall
suspend operations immediately.
 
   (h)   Revocation of food establishment permit.
      (1)   The Board of Health of the City Health District may, after
providing the operator of a food establishment an opportunity for a hearing,
revoke a permit for:
         A.   Violations as denoted in Section
1711.02(g); or
         B.   Repeated violations of this chapter, found in consecutive
inspections; or
         C.   Interference with the Health Commissioner or an authorized
representative in the performance of his duty.
      (2)   Before revocation, the Health Commissioner shall notify the holder
of the permit to operate the food establishment, or the person in charge, in
writing, of the reasons for which such permit is subject to revocation.  The
permit to operate the food establishment shall be revoked at the end of the ten
days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is
filed with the Board of Health by the holder of the permit within such ten-day
period.  If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the
revocation of the permit to operate the food establishment becomes final.
 
   (i)   Service of notice.  A notice provided for in this section is properly
served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit to operate, the person
in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, with return
receipt requested, or posted on the premises of the food establishment.  A copy
of the notice shall be filed in the record of the City Health Department.
 
   (j)   Hearings.  A hearing, as provided for in this section, shall be
conducted by the Board of Health at a time and place so designated by the Board
of Health.  Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim,
and the Board of Health shall make provisions for sufficient copies of the
transcript of such hearings.  The Board of Health of the City Health District
shall make a final decision based upon the complete hearing record and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or orders considered in the hearing.  A
written report of the final decision of the Board of Health, including the
reason(s) for such decision, shall be furnished to all interested parties
within ten days after date of hearing.
 
   (k)   Application of permit reinstatement.  Whenever a permit to operate a
food establishment within the City Health District has been revocated, the
holder of such permit may make written application to the Board of Health for a
new permit as provided for in Section
1711.02(b).
 
   (l)   Before approving an application to operate a food establishment within
the City Health District, the Health Commissioner, or an authorized
representative, shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine
compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.03  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PHYSICAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   Floor Construction.
      (1)   Floors and floor coverings of all food preparation, food storage
and warewashing areas, and floors of all walk-in refrigerators, dressing rooms,
employee locker rooms, toilet rooms and vestibules, shall be constructed of
smooth durable materials such as sealed concrete, terrazzo, quarry tile,
ceramic tile, durable grades of vinyl or plastic tile or tightfitting wood
impregnated with plastic, and shall be maintained in good repair.
      (2)   Floors which are water flushed or receive discharge of water or
other fluid wastes or are in areas where pressurized spray methods are used for
cleaning, shall be provided with properly installed trapped drains.  Such
floors shall be constructed of sealed concrete, terrazzo tile, quarry tile,
ceramic tile or similar materials and shall be graded to drain.  All other
floors shall be so constructed as to provide for the juncture between walls and
floor to be covered with no more than a 1/32 inch (0.8mm) open seam.
 
   (b)   Floor Carpeting.  Carpeting, if used as a floor covering, shall be of
closely woven construction, properly installed, easily cleanable and maintained
in good repair.  Carpeting shall not be used in food preparation and
warewashing areas, in food storage areas or in toilet areas where urinals or
fixtures are located.
 
   (c)   Prohibited Floor Coverings.  Sawdust, wood shavings, granular salt,
baked clay, diatomaceous earth or similar materials shall not be used as floor
coverings;  however, these materials may be used in amounts necessary for
immediate clean-up of spills or drippage on floors.
 
   (d)   Mats and Duckboards.  Mats and duckboards shall be of nonabsorbent,
grease resistant materials, and shall be of such design and construction to
facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained in good repair.
 
   (e)   Utility Line Installation.  Exposed utility service lines and pipes
shall be installed so as not to obstruct or prevent cleaning of the walls and
floors.  Installation of exposed horizontal utility service lines and pipes on
the floor are prohibited.
 
   (f)   Walls and Ceilings.  All walls, wall coverings and ceilings of
refrigeration units, food preparation areas, warewashing areas, toilets and
their vestibules shall be constructed of smooth nonabsorbent, and easily
cleanable materials.  Concrete or pumice blocks and bricks used for interior
wall construction in these locations shall be finished and sealed so as to
provide a smooth easily cleanable surface.
 
   (g)   Attachments and Covering Materials.
      (1)   Light fixtures, vent coverings, wall mounted fans, decorative
materials and similar attachments to walls and ceilings shall be easily
cleanable and shall be maintained in good repair.
      (2)   Walls and ceiling covering material shall be attached and sealed in
such a manner so they may be easily cleanable.
 
   (h)   Cleaning Physical Facilities.  Cleaning of floors, walls and ceilings
shall be done as often as necessary.  Only dustless methods of cleaning floors,
walls and ceilings shall be used.  Floors, mats, duckboards, walls, ceilings,
attachments, and decorative material shall be kept clean at all times.
 
   (i)   Service Sinks.  At least one service sink or curbed cleaning facility
with floor drain shall be provided and used for cleaning of mops and similar
wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water or similar liquid
cleaning waste water.  Handwashing or warewashing facilities, or food
preparation sinks shall not be used for this purpose.
 
   (j)   Lighting.
      (1)   Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be installed so as
to provide at least twenty foot candles of light on all food preparation
surfaces and at warewashing work levels.
      (2)   Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be so installed as
to provide, at least a distance of thirty inches (762 mm) of light from the
floor, and at least twenty foot candle (215 lux) of light in all sales areas,
utensil and equipment storage areas, handwashing and toilet areas; and at least
ten foot candles (108 lux) of light in walk-in refrigeration units, dry food
storage areas, and all other areas.
 
   (k)   Protective Shielding.
      (1)   All lighting located over or within food storage, food preparation,
food display facilities and where utensils and equipment are cleaned and stored
shall be shielded, coated or otherwise provided with shatter proof shielding
devices or materials.
      (2)   Infrared or other heat lamps shall be protected against breakage by
a shield surrounding and extending beyond the bulb, leaving only the face of
the bulb exposed.
 
   (l)   Ventilation.  All rooms of a retail food establishment shall be
properly ventilated and kept free of excessive heat, steam, condensation,
vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes.  Ventilation systems shall be
installed and operated so the discharge of intake and exhaust air shall not
create nuisances and will be maintained to prevent the entrance of dust, dirt,
insects and other contaminating materials.
 
   (m)   Dressing Rooms and Locker Areas.  Rooms shall be provided and
designated as employee dressing areas and lockers or other suitable facilities
shall be provided and used for the orderly storage of employee clothing and
other personal effects.  This room shall be separated from all food preparation
areas.
 
   (n)   Poisonous and Toxic Materials.
      (1)   Only those poisonous or toxic materials necessary and intended for
the maintenance of the food establishment, including the cleaning and
sanitization of equipment and utensils, and the control of insects and rodents,
shall be present in food establishments, except those items being stored and/or
displayed for sale to the consumer or other persons.
      (2)   Containers of poisonous and/or toxic materials necessary for
operational maintenance of food establishments shall be prominently and
distinctly labeled in accordance with all federal, state and local
requirements.  Small working containers of bulk cleaning agents shall be
individually labeled for easy identification of contents.
      (3)   Insecticides, rodenticides, detergents, sanitizers, and related
cleaning or drying agents, and caustics, acids, polishes and other chemicals,
shall be stored, located or displayed so they are physically separated from
each other and shall be stored, located or displayed in such a manner so they
are not intermingled with food, food products, equipment, utensils, or single-
service articles, except detergents, sanitizers and sanitizers intended for
warewashing facilities may be stored for convenient use.
      (4)   Sanitizers, cleaning compounds or other compounds intended for use
on food-contact surfaces shall not be used in any way that leaves a residue on
such surfaces, nor in any way that constitutes a hazard to employees or other
persons.
      (5)   Poisonous or toxic materials shall not be used in any way that
contaminates food, food products, equipment or utensils, or in any way other
than specified in the manufacturer's labeling.
 
   (o)   Storage and Display of Materials for Sale.  Poisonous or toxic
materials stored or displayed for sale shall be separated from food, food
products and single-service articles by spacing, partitioning or dividers, nor
shall they be stored or displayed above food, food products or single-service
articles.
 
   (p)   First-Aid Supplies and Personal Medications.  Food establishment
employee first-aid supplies and personal medications shall be stored in a way
that prevents contamination of food, food products and food-contact surfaces.
 
   (q)   Premises.
      (1)   Food establishments and all parts thereto of the premises used in
connection with the operation of the establishment shall be free from litter
and other articles not essential to the operation or maintenance of the
establishment.
      (2)   Walkways and driving surfaces of all exterior areas of food
establishments shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or other suitable
material to facilitate maintenance and minimize dust.  These surfaces shall be
graded to facilitate drainage.
 
   (r)   Living Areas.  No operation of a food establishment shall be conducted
in any room used as living or sleeping quarters.  All food establishment
operations shall be separated from any living or sleeping quarters by complete
partitioning and/or solid self-closing doors.
 
   (s)   Laundry Facilities.
      (1)   Food establishments providing laundry facilities within the
building shall be restricted to the washing and drying of linens and work
clothes used only in the operation of the establishment.  Where such articles
are laundered on the premises, an electric or gas dryer shall be provided and
used.
      (2)   Separate rooms shall be provided for laundry facilities, away from
storage rooms containing food, food products, packaged and single-service
articles.
      (3)   Clean laundered work clothes and linens, including articles such as
clean wiping cloths shall be stored in a clean place and protected from
contamination until used.
      (4)   Soiled work clothes, linen and articles such as soiled wiping
cloths shall be kept in nonabsorbent containers or washable laundry bags until
removed for laundering and shall be stored to prevent contamination of food,
food products, food equipment and utensils.
 
   (t)   Cleaning Equipment and Storage.  Maintenance and cleaning tools such
as brooms, mops, vacuum cleaners and similar equipment shall be maintained in
good repair and stored in such a way that prevents contamination of food, food
products, single-service articles, utensils, equipment or linens and
facilitates cleaning of the storage location.
 
   (u)   Animals.  Live animals shall be excluded from within all food
establishments, with the exception of edible fish, crustacea, shellfish and
fish in an aquarium.
      (1)   Live or dead fish bait shall be stored separately from food and
food products.
      (2)   Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers shall be
permitted in offices, storage areas and outside establishment premises.  Sentry
dogs may be permitted to run loose in outside fenced areas for security
reasons.  Guide dogs accompanying blind persons shall be permitted in sales
areas.
      (3)   While on duty, persons employed in the food operational areas of a
food establishment shall not care for or handle any pets or patrol or sentry
dogs.
      (Ord. 89-20.  Passed  1-10-89.)
 
1711.04  HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   No employee of a food establishment, while infected with a
communicable disease, boils, infected wounds or acute respiratory infection
shall work in a food establishment in any capacity in which there is the
possibility of contamination of food, food products or food-contact surfaces,
or the spread of pathogenic organisms to other persons.
 
   (b)   Employees engaged in food preparation and warewashing operations shall
thoroughly wash their hands and exposed portions of their arms with soap or
detergent and warm water before beginning work; after smoking, eating or using
the toilet; before and after handling raw meat, or poultry or raw seafood; and
as often as is necessary during working hours to keep them clean.  Employees
shall keep their fingernails trimmed and clean.
 
   (c)   Employees of food establishments shall wear clean clothing and use
effective hair restraints where necessary to prevent the contamination of food
and food-contact surfaces.
 
   (d)   Employees shall maintain personal cleanliness and shall conform to
good hygienic practices at all times during working hours.  Employees shall not
consume food or use tobacco products in areas other than those so designated
for such activities.
 
   (e)   When there is reasonable cause to suspect possible disease
transmission from any food establishment employee, the Health Commissioner may
secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make any other
investigation indicated and shall take appropriate action.  The Health
Commissioner may require:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in all food
establishments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in
the opinion of the Health Commissioner, no further danger of disease outbreak
exists;
      (3)   Restriction of the employee's service to some area of the food
establishment where there is no danger of transmitting disease;
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, or
other employees, and the body discharges of such employees.
         (Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.05  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Before the construction or remodeling of a food establishment and
whenever an existing structure is converted for the use of a food
establishment, detail plans and specifications of such construction, major
remodeling or conversion must be submitted to the Ohio Department of
Agriculture and the City Board of Health for review and approval.  When plans
are submitted to the Board of Health, these plans shall be acted upon within
thirty days after date of receipt.
 
   (b)   All plans and specifications submitted to the Board of Health shall
clearly confirm that all provisions of this chapter can be met adequately.  All
plans and specifications shall include:
      (1)   The type of operation proposed and foods and food products and
other items to be prepared and/or offered for sale to the general public for
their use or human consumption;
      (2)   Total area to be used for the food establishment operation;
      (3)   All locations within the establishment where food or food products
are to be prepared, stored or displayed;
      (4)   All entrances and exits;
      (5)   Location, number and types of plumbing fixtures, including all
water supply and toilet facilities;
      (6)   All plans of lighting, both natural and artificial, with foot-
candles indicated for critical areas;
      (7)   All floor plans showing the general layout of fixtures and other
equipment;
      (8)   Building materials and surface finishes to be used; and
      (9)   All equipment identified with manufacturers and model numbers.
 
   (c)   The City Health District shall treat plans and specifications as
confidential and/or trade secret information in accordance with state and
federal laws and shall approve all plans and specifications, provided they meet
all requirements of these regulations within thirty days after receipt.
 
   (d)   Preoperational inspection.  Whenever plans and specifications of a
food establishment have been approved, and prior to the beginning of operations
of the establishment an inspection of the food establishment shall be conducted
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and
requirements of these regulations.
 
   (e)   Approval of equipment.  All equipment used in a food establishment
operation shall be of a type approved by the Board of Health or by the NSF
(National Sanitation Foundation).  All equipment shall be of such material and
so constructed and installed as to readily conform to these regulations.
 
   (f)   Plan review fee.  The following plan review fees shall be paid:
 
 
                                                                                    Plan
    Food Establishment                                                             Review
                                                                                    Fee
(1)  Food establishments selling pre-packaged, nonperishable food only.             $ 
                                                                                    10.00
(2)  Food establishments selling all pre-packaged food items, including perishable  20.00
     foods.
     Carnival and/or fair operations and roadside stands (mobile or stationary),
     operating within the City for no more than thirty consecutive days and which
(3)  are not covered under Ohio R.C. 3732.01, selling confections such as:  cotton 20.00
     candy, snow cones, candy apples, popcorn, sugar waffles, peanuts, soft ice
     cream, etc.
(4)  Non-seasonal food establishments selling fruits and vegetables.                20.00
(5)  Food establishments that package or dispense candy, peanuts, ice cream and     20.00
     other confectionery items.
(6)  Warehouses storing packaged food and/or beverages for distributing.            20.00
(7)  Wholesale fruit and produce distributors.                                      20.00
(8)  Food establishments of less than 2,500 square feet, selling all food items,    20.00
     including the packaging and handling of various raw food products.
(9)  Food establishments of 2,500 feet or more selling all food items, including    30.00
     the packaging and handling of raw food products.
(10) Beverage plants and bakeries.                                                  30.00
         (Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
1711.06  EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS.
   (a)   Multi-Use Equipment and Utensils.  Multi-use equipment shall be
constructed of material and design which under normal use shall be resistant to
denting, buckling, distortion, pitting, scratching, crazing, chipping and
decomposition, and shall be nonabsorbent with a smooth, easily cleanable
surface.  Single-service articles shall be made from clean, sanitary, safe
materials.  All equipment, utensils and single-service articles shall not
impart odors, color, taste or contribute to the contamination of food or food
products.
 
   (b)   Solder.  If solder is used, it shall be composed of safe materials and
be corrosion-resistant.
 
   (c)   Wood Construction.  All equipment and utensils constructed of wood
shall be of the hard maple variety or equivalent which is nonabsorbent and
meets all requirements of this chapter, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof. 
Wood shall not be used as a food-contact surface under any circumstances,
except for contact with raw fruits, raw vegetables and nuts in the shell.
 
   (d)   Plastics and Rubber Materials.  Safe plastic or safe rubber or safe
rubber-like materials that are resistant under normal conditions of use to
scratching, scoring, decomposition, crazing, chipping and distortion, that are
of sufficient weight and thickness to permit cleaning and sanitizing by normal
warewashing methods, and which meet the general requirements set forth in
subsection (a) hereof, may be permitted for repeated use.
 
   (e)   Cutting Surfaces.  Cutting surfaces subject to scratching and scoring
must be resurfaced so as to be easily cleanable, or be discarded when the
surface can no longer be effectively cleaned and sanitized.
 
   (f)   Single-Service Articles.  Single-service articles shall not be reused.
 
   (g)   Equipment and Utensil Design and Fabrication.
      (1)   All equipment and utensils, including plasticware, shall be
designed and fabricated for durability under normal circumstances and shall
conform to the regulations as set forth in this section.
      (2)   Food-contact surfaces shall be easily cleanable, smooth and free of
breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits and similar imperfection, and free of
difficult-to-clean internal corners and crevices.  Cast iron may be used as a
food-contact surface only if the surface is used for cooking.  Threads shall be
designed to facilitate cleaning; ordinary "V" type threads are prohibited in
food-contact surfaces, except that in equipment such as ice makers, hot oil
cooking equipment or hot oil filtering systems, such threads shall be
minimized.
      (3)   Equipment containing bearings and gears requiring lubricants not
made of safe materials shall be designed and constructed so that the lubricant
cannot leak, drip or be forced into food or onto food contact surfaces. 
Equipment designed to receive lubrication of bearings and gears on or within
food-contact surfaces shall be lubricated with materials meeting the
requirements of 21 CFR 178.3570.
      (4)   Sinks and drain boards shall be sloped to drain and be self-
draining.
 
   (h)   Food-Contact Surface.  Food-contact surface equipment shall be
designed for in-place cleaning or be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection:
      (1)   Without being disassembled; or
      (2)   By disassembling without the use of tools; or
      (3)   By easy disassembling with the use of only simple tools, such as
mallets, screwdrivers or open-end wrenches which are kept near the equipment.
 
   (i)   Equipment Cleaning in Place.  Equipment designed and constructed for
cleaning-in-place shall meet the requirements equivalent to those contained in
subsection (h) hereof.
 
   (j)   Food Product Thermometers.  Indicating thermometers required for
immersion into food or cooking media shall be of metal stem-type construction,
numerically scaled and accurate to +2o F. (+1o C).
 
   (k)   Non-Food-Contact Surfaces.  Surfaces of equipment not intended for
contact with food, but which are exposed to splash or food debris or which
otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be designed and fabricated to be
smooth, washable, free of unnecessary ledges, projections or crevices, and
readily accessible for cleaning and shall be of such materials to be easily
cleaned and maintained and in good sanitary condition.
 
   (l)   Ventilation Hoods.  Ventilation hoods and devices, where installed,
shall be designed to prevent grease or condensation from collecting on walls
and ceilings, and from dripping into food or onto food-contact surfaces. 
Filter or other grease extracting equipment shall be readily removable for
cleaning and replacement, if not designed to be cleaned in place.
 
   (m)   Maintenance of Equipment and Utensils.  All equipment and utensils
shall be maintained in good repair and comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
 
   (n)   Equipment Installation and Location.  Equipment, including ice makers
and ice storage equipment, shall not be located under exposed or unprotected
sewer lines, water lines that are leaking or on which condensed water
accumulates, open stairwells or other sources of contamination.
 
   (o)   Table-Mounted Equipment.
      (1)   Table-mounted equipment shall be installed to facilitate the
cleaning of the equipment and adjacent areas.
      (2)   Equipment that is mounted on tables or counters, unless portable,
shall be sealed to the table or counter or elevated on legs to provide at least
a four-inch (102 mm) clearance between the table or counter, except that if no
parts of the table under the equipment is no more than eighteen inches (457 mm)
from cleaning access, the clearance space shall be three inches (76 mm) or
more; or if no part of the table under the equipment is more than three inches
(76 mm) from cleaning access, the clearance space shall be two inches (51 mm)
or more.
      (3)   Equipment is portable within the meaning of this subsection (o) if:
         A.   It is small and light enough to be moved easily by one person;
and
         B.   It has no utility connection, has a utility that disconnects
quickly or has a flexible utility connection line of sufficient length to
permit the equipment to be moved for easy cleaning; and
         C.   It is table-mounted, such as powered mixers, grinders, slicers,
tenderizers and similar equipment, and;
            1.   Does not exceed eighty pounds (thirty-six kilograms), or
            2.   Is equipped with mechanical means of safety tilting the unit
for cleaning.
 
   (p)   Floor-Mounted Equipment.
      (1)   Floor-mounted equipment, unless easily movable, shall be:
         A.   Sealed to the floor; or
         B.   Elevated on legs to provide at least six-inches (152 mm)
clearance between the floor and equipment, except that equipment may be
elevated to provide at least a four-inch (102 mm) clearance between the floor
and equipment if no part of the floor under the equipment is more than six-
inches (152 mm) from cleaning access.
         C.   Display shelving units, display refrigeration units, and display
freezer units are exempt from provisions of subsection (p)(1) hereof, if they
are installed so that the floor beneath the units can be easily cleaned.
      (2)   Equipment is easily movable if:
         A.   It is mounted on wheels or casters; and
         B.   It has no utility connection, has a utility connection that
disconnects quickly or has a flexible utility line of sufficient length to
permit the equipment to be moved for easy cleaning.
      (3)   Unless sufficient space is provided for easy cleaning between,
behind, and above each unit of fixed equipment, the space between it and the
adjoining equipment units and adjacent walls or ceilings shall be no more than
1/32 inch (.08 mm) and, if exposed to seepage, the space shall be sealed.
 
   (q)   Aisles and Working Areas.  Aisles and working areas between units of
equipment and between equipment and walls, shall be unobstructed and of
sufficient width to permit employees to perform their duties readily without
contamination of food or food-contact surfaces by clothing or personal
contact.  All easily movable storage equipment such as dollies, skids, racks
and open-ended pallets shall be positioned to provide accessibility to working
areas.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.07  CLEANING, SANITIZATION AND STORAGE OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS.
   (a)   Cleaning Frequency.
      (1)   Utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned
and sanitized;
         A.   Each time there is a change in processing between raw beef, raw
pork, raw poultry or raw seafood, or a change in processing from raw to ready-
to-eat foods;
         B.   After any interruption of operations during which time
contamination may have occurred; and
         C.   After final use each working day.
      (2)   Where equipment and utensils are used for the preparation of
potentially hazardous foods on a continuous or production-line basis, utensils
and the food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned and sanitized at
intervals throughout the day on a schedule based on food temperature, type of
food and amount of food particle accumulation.
      (3)   The food-contact surfaces of cooking devices and the cavities and
door seals of microwave ovens shall be cleaned at least once each day of use,
except that this shall not apply to hot oil cooking equipment and hot oil
filtering systems.  The food-contact surfaces of all baking equipment and pans
shall be kept free of encrusted grease deposits and other accumulated soils.
      (4)   Non-food-contact surfaces of equipment, including transport
vehicles, shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to keep the equipment free
of accumulation of dust, dirt, food particles and other debris.
 
   (b)   Cleaning Materials.
      (1)   Cloths or sponges used for wiping food spills on food-contact
surfaces of equipment shall be clean and rinsed frequently in an approved
sanitizing solution.  These cloths and sponges shall be kept in the sanitizing
solution between uses.
      (2)   Cloths or sponges used for cleaning non-food-contact surfaces of
equipment shall be clean and rinsed as specified in subsection (b)(1) hereof
and used for no other purpose.
      (3)   Single-service disposable towels are permitted in lieu of wiping
cloths or sponges if they are discarded after each use.
 
   (c)   Manual Cleaning and Sanitizing.
      (1)   For manual cleaning and sanitizing of equipment and utensils, a
sink with not less than three compartments shall be provided and used.  Sink
compartments shall be large enough to accommodate the immersion of equipment
and utensils, and each compartment of the sink shall be supplied with hot and
cold potable running water.  Where immersion in sinks is impracticable,
equipment and utensils shall be cleaned and sanitized manually or by pressure
spray methods.
      (2)   Drain boards or easily moveable utensil tables of adequate size
shall be provided for proper storage and handling of soiled utensils prior to
cleaning and for cleaned utensils following sanitizing and shall be located so
as not to interfere with proper use of warewashing facilities.
      (3)   Equipment and utensils shall be preflushed or prescraped and, when
necessary, presoaked to remove food particles and soil.
      (4)   All sinks shall be cleaned before use, and the cleaning process of
equipment and utensils shall be in the following manner:
         A.   Equipment and utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned in the first
compartment with hot detergent solution that is kept clean and at a
concentration indicated on the manufacturer's label; and
         B.   Equipment and utensils shall be rinsed free of detergent and
abrasives with clean water in the second compartment; and
         C.   Equipment and utensils shall be sanitized in the third
compartment according to methods required in this chapter.
      (5)   When pressure spray methods are utilized for cleaning and
sanitizing, the equipment and utensils shall be thoroughly flushed with a
detergent-sanitizer solution until the article is free of visible food
particles and soil.  The detergent-sanitizer shall be used in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions and shall be of a type that does not require a
potable water rinse when used according to the manufacturer's instruction.
      (6)   The food-contact surface of all equipment and utensils shall be
sanitized by:
         A.   Immersion for at least thirty seconds in clean, hot water of a
temperature of at least 170o F (77o C); or
         B.   Immersion for at least one minute in a clean solution containing
at least fifty parts per million of available chlorine as a hypochlorite and
having a temperature of at least 75o F (24o C); or
         C.   Immersion for at least one minute in a clean solution containing
at least twelve and one-half parts per million of available iodine, having a pH
range which the manufacturer has demonstrated to be effective and at a
temperature of at least 75o F (24o C); or
         D.   Immersion for at least one minute in a clean solution containing
200 parts per million of a quaternary ammonium compound and having a
temperature of at least 75o F (24o C).  The quaternary ammonium compound used
shall have been compounded by the manufacturer to assure effectiveness in
waters up to 500 parts per million hardness at use concentration; or
         E.   Immersion in a clean solution containing any other chemical
sanitizing agent allowed under 21 CFR 178.1010 that will provide the equivalent
bactericidal effect of a solution containing at least fifty parts per million
of available chlorine as a hypochlorite at a temperature of at least 75o F (24o
C) for one minute; or
         F.   Treatment with steam free from materials or additives other than
those specified in 21 CFR 173.310 in the case of equipment too large to
sanitize by immersion, but in which steam can be confined; or
         G.   Rinsing, spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing solution
of at least twice the strength required for that particular sanitizing solution
under this section in the case of equipment too large to sanitize by immersion.
      (7)   When hot water is used for sanitizing, the following equipment
shall be provided and used:
         A.   An integral heating device or fixture installed in, on or under
the sanitizing compartment of the sink capable of maintaining the water at a
temperature of at least 170o F (77o C); and
         B.   A numerically scaled indicating thermometer, accurate to + 2o F
(+1o C) convenient to the sink for frequent checks of water temperature; and
         C.   Utensil racks or baskets of such size and design to permit
complete immersion of utensils and equipment in the hot water.
      (8)   When chemicals are used for sanitization, they shall not have
concentrations higher than the maximum permitted under 21 CFR 178.1010 and a
test kit or other device that measures the parts per million concentration of
the solution shall be provided and used.
 
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (c)(1) hereof, a two-compartment sink may
be used for manually washing and sanitizing utensils and equipment when an
approved detergent-sanitizer is used and the two-compartment sink meet the
requirements of Chapter 3701-21 of the Ohio Administrative Code and has been in
use prior to May 1, 1983.
 
   (e)   Unless used immediately after sanitizing, all equipment and utensils
shall be air dried.  Towel drying shall not be permitted.
 
   (f)   Food establishments that do not have facilities for proper cleaning
and sanitizing of utensils and equipment shall not prepare or package food or
dispense unpackaged food other than raw fruits and raw vegetables.
 
   (g)   Equipment and Utensil Handling and Storage.  Cleaned and sanitized
equipment and utensils shall be handled in such a manner that they will be
protected from contamination.
      (1)   Cleaned and sanitized equipment and utensils shall be stored at
least six inches (152 mm) above the floor in a clean, dry location in a way
that protects them from splash, dust and other means of contamination.  The
food-contact surfaces of fixed equipment shall also be protected from
contamination.  Equipment and utensils shall not be placed under exposed or
unprotected sewer lines, or water lines that are leaking or on which
condensation has accumulated.
      (2)   Utensils shall be air dried before being stored or shall be stored
in self-draining positions.
      (3)   Stored utensils shall be covered or inverted wherever practical.
 
   (h)   Single-Service Articles.
      (1)   Single-service articles shall be stored in closed cartons or
containers at least six inches (152 mm) above the floor or on easily movable
dollies, skids, racks or open-ended pallets.  Such storage shall protect the
articles from contamination and shall not be located under exposed or
unprotected sewer lines, or water lines that are leaking or on which
condensation accumulates.
      (2)   Single-service articles shall be handled in a manner which prevents
contamination of surfaces that may come in contact with food.
 
   (i)   Prohibited Storage Areas.  Food equipment, utensils or single-service
articles shall not be stored in locker rooms, toilet rooms or their vestibules,
garbage rooms or mechanical rooms.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.08  SANITARY FACILITIES AND CONTROLS.
   (a)   Water supply. A sufficient potable water supply shall be provided food
establishments from a source constructed, maintained and operated in accordance
with all applicable state, federal and local regulations.
 
   (b)   All potable water not provided a food establishment directly from an
approved source by pipe shall be delivered in a bulk water transport system and
shall be transferred to a closed water system.  Both systems shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with all applicable state,
federal and local regulations.
 
   (c)   Water, under pressure, at the required temperatures shall be provided
to all fixtures and equipment that use water.
 
   (d)   Steam used in contact with food or food-contact surfaces shall be free
from material or additives other than those specified in 21 CFR 173.310.
 
   (e)   Sewage.  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a
sanitary sewage system or by a sewage disposal system constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.  Nonwater carried
sewage disposal facilities are prohibited, except as permitted by the Board of
Health.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.09  PLUMBING.
   (a)   Installation.  Plumbing shall be installed in food establishments in
accordance with the Ohio Plumbing Code.  There shall be no cross-connections
between the potable water supply and any other containing:
      (1)   Water of unknown or questionable quality; or
      (2)   Contaminants or pollutants.
 
   (b)   Non-potable Water System.
      (1)   A non-potable water system is permitted for air conditioning,
equipment cooling and fire protection, and shall be installed in accordance
with applicable state, federal and local regulations.  Non-potable water shall
not directly or indirectly contact food or equipment or utensils that contact
food.
      (2)   All piping from a non-potable water system shall be durably
identified and readily distinguishable from the potable water supply.
 
   (c)   Backflow.  The potable water supply to a food establishment shall be
protected with a backflow prevention device in accordance with the requirement
of the Ohio Plumbing Code.  The backflow device shall be installed to protect
the potable water supply against contamination from any backflow or back-
siphonage within the establishment structure.  All water faucets and fixtures
shall be installed in such a manner as to provide an air gap of at least twice
the diameter of the water supply inlet and the flood level rim of the fixture. 
No hose shall be attached to a faucet that is not equipped with a backflow
prevention device.
 
   (d)   Grease Traps.  All grease traps and interceptors shall be installed in
accordance with the Ohio Plumbing Code and located in easily accessible places
for maintenance and cleaning.  Grease traps and interceptors shall be
maintained by the Owner so as to be in continuous effective operation.  The
City may require an Owner to document the cleaning of grease traps and
interceptors at specified intervals.  An owner who fails to install, maintain
or clean a grease trap or interceptor is subject to a Class A civil penalty as
described in Section 1324.02 of these Codified Ordinances.
 
   (e)   Drains.  Except for properly trapped open sinks, there shall be no
direct connection between the sewerage system and any drains originating from
equipment in which food, portable equipment or utensils are placed.  When a
warewashing machine is located within five feet of a trapped floor drain, the
warewasher waste outlet may be connected directly to the inlet of a properly
vented and trapped floor drain.
 
   (f)   Toilet Facilities.  Toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance
with Section 4101:2-28-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code (Article 28 of the
Ohio Basic Building Code).  Toilet rooms shall be provided each sex and all
toilet rooms that open into food preparation, equipment and utensil washing, or
storage areas shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-
closing doors, which shall be closed except during cleaning and maintenance. 
Toilet facilities shall be conveniently located and shall be accessible to
employees at all times.
      (1)   Toilets and urinals shall be designed and installed so as to be
easily cleanable.
      (2)   Lavatories shall be provided and installed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and shall be located for convenient use by all employees
in food packaging and/or preparation areas, and equipment and utensil washing
areas.  Lavatories shall be located in or immediately adjacent to toilet rooms
or vestibules.
      (3)   Each lavatory shall be provided with hot and cold potable running
water.
      (4)   A supply of hand-cleaning soap or detergent shall be available at
each lavatory.  Each lavatory shall be supplied with sanitary hand towels or a
hand-drying device providing heated air which is conveniently located for
employee use when using the lavatory.
      (5)   Toilet facilities, including toilet fixtures and related
vestibules, shall be kept clean and in good repair.  A supply of toilet tissue
shall be provided at each toilet at all times.  Easily cleanable receptacles
shall be provided for waste materials.  Toilet rooms provided women shall have
at least one covered waste receptacle.
 
   (g)   Handwashing Facilities.  Handwashing facilities shall be installed in
accordance with all applicable regulations, and there shall be at least one and
not less than the number required by all applicable food protection
regulations, and shall be conveniently located for employee use in food
preparation and warewashing areas.  Handwashing facilities shall be accessible
to employees at all times.  Sinks used for food preparation or warewashing
shall not be used for washing of hands or other such uses.
      (1)   Each handwashing facility shall be provided with hot and cold water
tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet.  Any self-closing,
slow-closing or metering faucet used shall be designed to provide a flow of
water for at least fifteen seconds without having to be reactivated.  Steam
mixing valves are prohibited at handwashing facilities.
      (2)   A supply of hand-cleaning soap or detergent shall be available at
each handwashing facility.  A supply of sanitary towels or a hand-drying device
providing heated air shall be conveniently located near each handwashing
facility.  Common towels are prohibited.  At least one easily cleanable waste
receptacle shall be conveniently located near each handwashing facility.
      (3)   Handwashing facilities, soap or detergent dispensers, hand-drying
devices and all related facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair.
 
   (h)   Garbage and Refuse.  Garbage and refuse shall be held in durable,
easily cleanable, insect-resistant, and rodent-proof containers that do not
leak and do not absorb liquids.  Plastic bags and wet strength paper bags may
be used to line these containers.  Such bags and durable plastic garbage and
refuse containers may be used for storage inside the retail food store.
      (1)   Containers used in food preparation and equipment and utensil
washing areas shall be kept covered during nonworking hours and after they have
been filled.
      (2)   Containers stored outside the establishment, including dumpsters,
compactors and compactor systems, shall be provided with tight-fitting lids,
doors, or covers, and shall be kept covered when not in use.  In containers
designed with drains, drain plugs shall be in place at all times, except during
cleaning.
      (3)   There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all the
garbage and refuse that accumulates.
      (4)   Soiled containers shall be cleaned as needed to prevent insect and
rodent attraction.  Each container shall be thoroughly cleaned on the inside
and on the outside in a manner that does not contaminate food, food products,
equipment, utensils or food preparation areas.  Suitable facilities, detergent,
and hot water or steam, shall be provided and used for cleaning containers. 
Liquid waste from compacting or cleaning operations shall be disposed of as
sewage.
 
   (i)   Garbage and Refuse Storage.  Garbage and refuse on the premises of a
food establishment shall be stored in a manner to make them inaccessible to
insects and rodents.  Outside storage of non-rodent-resistant plastic
containers, unprotected plastic bags, wet strength paper bags or baled units
which contain garbage or refuse is prohibited.  Cardboard or other packing
materials not containing garbage or food wastes need not be stored in covered
containers, but must be stored in such a manner as to not create a nuisance.
      (1)   Garbage or refuse storage rooms, if used, shall be constructed of
easily cleanable, non-absorbent, washable materials, shall be kept clean, shall
be insect and rodent proof, and shall be large enough to store all the garbage
and refuse containers necessitated by disposal pick-up frequency.
      (2)   Outside storage areas or enclosures, shall be kept clean and shall
be large enough to store all the garbage and refuse containers necessitated by
disposal pick-up frequency.  Garbage and refuse containers, dumpsters and
compactor systems located outside, shall be stored on or above a smooth surface
of nonabsorbent material, such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt, that is
kept clean and maintained in good repair.
 
   (j)   Garbage and Refuse Disposal.  Garbage and refuse shall be stored and
disposed of as often as is necessary to prevent the development of
objectionable odors and the attraction of insects and rodents.
 
   (k)   Insect and Rodent Control.  Effective measures shall be utilized to
prevent the entry, presence, and propagation of rodents, flies, cockroaches or
other insects.  The premises shall be maintained in a state of repair that
prevents the harborage or feeding of insects or rodents.
 
   (l)   Rodent Protection.  All openings to the outside shall be protected
against the entry of rodents.  Outside openings shall be protected against the
entry of insects by tight-fitting, self-closing doors; closed windows,
screening; controlled air currents; or other means.  Screen doors shall be
self-closing, and screens for windows, skylights, intake and exhaust air ducts,
and other openings to the outside shall be tight-fitting and free of breaks. 
Screening materials shall not be less than sixteen mesh to the inch.
(Ord. 19-127.  Passed 5-7-19.)
 
1711.10  FOOD.
   Food shall be wholesome, in sound condition and safe for human consumption. 
Food shall be obtained from sources that comply with all applicable laws
relating to food safety.  Food prepared in a home shall not be used or offered
for sale.
   (a)   Milk.  Fluid milk and fluid milk products used or offered for sale
shall comply with Grade A standards as established by law.  Dry milk and milk
products used or offered for sale shall be made from pasteurized milk and milk
products.
   (b)   Shellfish.  Fresh and frozen shucked shellfish shall be packed in non-
returnable containers and identified with the name and address of the shucker-
packer and the state certification number issued according to law.  Shucked
shellfish should be kept in their original container until used or sold.  Each
container of unshucked shellfish shall be identified by an attached identifying
tag, which shall be retained for a period of ninety days, that states the name
and address of the original shellfish processor, the kind and quantity of
shellfish and the certification number issued by the state or foreign shellfish
control agency, where applicable.
   (c)   Eggs.  Only eggs, in clean shells, meeting applicable grade standards
or pasteurized liquid, frozen or dry eggs, or pasteurized dry egg products
shall be used or offered for sale.
   (d)   Ice.  Only ice manufactured from potable water and handled in a
sanitary manner shall be used or offered for sale.  Ice offered for sale shall
be packaged.
   (e)   Food Protection.  Food shall be protected at all times from cross-
contamination between foods and potential contamination by insects,
insecticides, rodents, redenticides, probe-type pricing or probe-type
identification tags, unclean equipment and utensils, unnecessary handling,
flooding, draining and overhead leakage or condensation, or other agents of
public health significance.  The temperature of potentially hazardous foods
shall be 45o F. (7o C) or below or 140o F. (60o C) or above at all times,
except as otherwise provided in this section.  Hermetically sealed packages
shall be handled so as to maintain product and container integrity.  Food items
that are spoiled, outdated or in damaged containers that may affect the product
and those food items that have been returned to, or are being detained by, the
food establishment because of spoilage, container damage or other public health
considerations, shall be segregated and held in designated areas pending proper
disposition unless disposed of under the supervision of the City Health
Department or the Ohio Department of Agriculture.
   (f)   Food Storage.  Food packaged in an immediate closed container, once
the container is opened in the food establishment prior to use or sale, shall
be kept covered and protected from contamination.  Food, whether raw or
prepared, if removed from the immediate closed container in which it was
originally packaged prior to use or offered for sale, shall be stored in a
clean, covered container, except during necessary periods of preparation. 
Whole and unprocessed fresh raw vegetables and fresh raw fruits shall be
exempted from this requirement.  Container covers shall be impervious and
nonabsorbent.  During periods of storage, subprimal cuts of meat shall be
covered with single-service wrapping material.  Primal cuts, quarters or sides
of meat, or processed meats such as country hams, slab bacon and smoked or
cured sausages, may be hung uncovered on clean, sanitized hooks or placed on
clean, sanitized metal racks in such a manner as to preclude contamination of
any food products in storage.
   (1)   Containers of food shall be stored a minimum of six inches (152 mm)
above the floor or stored on dollies, skids, racks or open-ended pallets,
provided such equipment is easily movable, either by hand or with the use of
pallet-moving equipment that is on the premises and used.  Such storage areas
shall be kept clean.  Cased food packaged in cans, glass or other waterproof
containers need not be elevated when the case of food is not exposed to floor
moisture and the storage area is kept clean.
   (2)   Food and containers of food shall not be stored under exposed or
unprotected sewer lines, or water lines that are leaking or on which condensed
water accumulates.
   (3)   Packaged foods shall not be stored in contact with water or undrained
ice.
   (4)   Food ingredients such as flour, sugar, salt, baking power, cooking oil
or vinegar, that is not stored in the original container and is not readily
identifiable on sight, shall be stored in containers and identified by their
common name.
   (5)   Toilet rooms and their vestibules, and garbage or mechanical rooms
shall not be used for storage of food or food products.
   (g)   Refrigerated Storage.
      (1)   Refrigeration units or effectively insulated units shall be
provided in sufficient number and capacity to assure the proper refrigerated
storage of potentially hazardous foods at their required temperatures.  Each
mechanically refrigerated unit storing potentially hazardous food shall be
equipped with numerically scaled indicating thermometer, accurate to + 2o F (+
1o C).  The sensing element shall be located to measure the air temperature in
the unit at a location that is representative of the air temperature in the
unit.  The thermometer scale shall be located to be easily readable.  Recording
thermometers, accurate to + 2o F (+ 1o C) may be used in lieu of indicating
thermometers.
      (2)   Potentially hazardous food requiring refrigeration after
preparation shall be rapidly cooled to an internal temperature of 45o F (7o C)
or below.  Potentially hazardous food of large volume or prepared in large
quantities shall be rapidly cooled utilizing such methods as shallow pans,
agitation, quick chilling, or water circulation external to the food container
so the cooling period shall not exceed four hours.  Potentially hazardous food
to be transported shall be pre-chilled and held at a temperture of 45o F (7o C)
or below unless maintained in accordance with hot storage requirements of this
section.
      (3)   Potentially hazardous frozen foods shall be kept frozen and stored
at air temperature of 0o F (-18o C) or below except for defrost cycles and
brief periods of loading or unloading.
      (4)   Ice used as a cooling medium for foods or food storage shall not be
used or sold for human consumption.
   (h)   Hot Storage.
   (1)   Hot food storage units shall be provided in such number and of such
capacity to assure the maintenance of potentially hazardous food at required
temperature during storage.  Each hot food storage unit storing potentially
hazardous food shall be equipped with a numerically scaled indicating
thermometer, accurate to +2o F (+ 1o C).  The sensing element shall be located
to measure the air temperature in the unit at a location that is representative
of the temperature in the unit.  The thermometer scale shall be located to be
easily readable.  Recording thermometers accurate to +2o F (+ 1o C) may be used
in lieu of indicating thermometers.  Where it is impractical to install
thermometers on equipment such as heat lamps, calrod units or insulated food
transport carrier, a food product thermometer shall be available to check
internal food temperatures.
   (2)   The internal temperature of potentially hazardous food requiring hot
storage shall be 140o F (60o C) or above, except during necessary periods of
preparation.  Potentially hazardous food to be transported shall be held at a
temperature of 140o F (60o C) or above unless maintained in accordance with the
refrigerated storage requirements of this section.
   (i)   Food Preparation.
   (1)   All food shall be prepared with a minimum of manual contact.  Food
shall be prepared on food-contact surfaces and with utensils which are clean
and have been sanitized.
   (2)   With each change in the processing of raw beef, raw pork, raw poultry
or raw seafood, or a change in processing from raw to ready-to-eat foods, each
new operation shall begin with clean food-contact surfaces and utensils which
have been sanitized.  Salads and other ready-to-eat foods should be prepared in
separate rooms or in areas that are separated by a barrier or open space from
areas used for processing potentially hazardous raw products.
   (3)   Potentially hazardous foods are in a form to be consumed without
further cooking such as salads, sandwiches and filled pastry products should be
prepared from chilled products.
   7(j)   Raw Fruits and Raw Vegetables.  Raw fruits and raw vegetables that
will be cut or combined with other ingredients or will be otherwise processed
into food products by the food establishment shall be thoroughly cleaned with
potable water before being used.
   (k)   Preparing Potentially Hazardous Foods.  Potentially hazardous foods
being processed within the food establishment by cooking shall be cooked to
heat all parts of the food to a temperature of at least 140o F (60o C) except
that:
   (1)   Poultry, poultry stuffings, stuffed meats and stuffings containing
meat, shall be cooked to all parts of the food to at last 165o F (74o C) with
no interruption of the cooking process.
   (2)   Pork and pork products shall be cooked to heat all parts of the food
to at least 150o F (66o C), or, if cooked in a microwave oven, to at least 170o
F (77o C).
   (3)   When beef roasts under ten pounds in weight are cooked in a still dry
heat oven, the oven shall be preheated to and held at an air temperature of at
least 350o F (177o C) throughout the process.  When cooked in a cenvection
oven, the oven shall be pre-heated to and held at an air temperature of at
least 325o F (163o C) throughout the process.  When beef roasts of ten pounds
or over in weight are cooked in a dry heat oven, the oven shall be pre-heated
to and held at an air temperature of at least 250o F (122o C) throughout the
process.
   (4)   Beef roasts, if cooked in a microwave oven, shall be cooked to an
internal temperature of at least 145o F (63o C).
   (l)   Bakery Product Fillings.  Custards, cream fillings, and similar
products, including synthetic fillings, shall meet the temperature requirements
in subsection (g) hereof following preparation and be maintained at that
temperature during storage, transportation, and display.  Products with
synthetic fillings may be excluded from this requirement if:
   (1)   The food, including the interface between the bakery product and the
filling has a pH level of 4.6 or below or a water activity (aw) value of 0.85
or less under standard conditions; or
   (2)   It is handled in such a manner as to preclude contamination with and
the growth of pathogenic microorganisms after heat processing; or
   (3)   Other scientific evidence is on file with the City Health Department
demonstrating that the specific product will not support the growth of
pathogenic microorganisms.
   (m)   Reheating Food.  Potentially hazardous foods that have been cooked and
then refrigerated shall be reheated rapidly to an internal temperature of 165o
F (74o C) or higher before being  placed in hot food storage holding units. 
Food warmers and other hot food holding units shall not be used for the
reheating of potentially hazardous foods.
   (n)   Food Product Thermometers.  Metal stem-type numericallly scaled
indicating thermometers, accurate to + 2o F (+ 1o C) shall be provided and used
to assure attainment and maintenance of proper temperatures during preparation
of all potentially hazardous foods.
   (o)   Thawing Potentially Hazardous Foods.  Potentially hazardous foods
shall be thawed:
      (1)   In a refrigerated unit at a temperature not to exceed 45o F (7o C);
or
      (2)   Under potable running water at a temperature of 170o F (21o C) or
below, with sufficient water velocity to agitate and float off loose food
particles into the overflow and for a period not to exceed that necessary to
thaw the food; or
      (3)   In a microwave oven only when the food will be immediately
transferred to conventional cooking units as part of a continuous cooking
process or when the entire, uninterrupted cooking process takes place in a
microwave oven; or
      (4)   As part of the conventional cooking process.
   (p)   Food Display.  Potentially hazardous foods shall be held at an
internal temperature of 45o F (7o C) or below or at an internal temperature of
140o F (60o C) or higher during display, except that rare roast beef offered
for sale hot shall be held at a temperature of at least 130o F (55o C).
   (q)   Frozen Foods.  Food intended for sale in a frozen state shall be
displayed at an air temperature of 0o F (-18o C) or below, except for defrost
cycles and brief periods of loading or unloading.  Frozen foods should be
displayed below or behind product food lines according to cabinet
manufacturer's specification.
   (r)   Food Products.  Food on display, other than whole, unprocessed raw
fruits and unprocessed raw vegetables, shall be protected from contamination by
being packaged, by display cases, by covered containers for self-service, or by
similar protective equipment.  All food shall be displayed above the floor in a
manner that protects the food from contamination.  Hot and cold food units
shall be provided to assure the maintenance of potentially hazardous food at
the required temperature during display.  Potentially hazardous food shall not
be provided for consumer self-service.
   (s)   Food Dispensing Utensils.  Unnecessary manual contact with food shall
be avoided and suitable dispensing utensils and single-service articles shall
be provided and used by the food establishment employees.  Consumers who serve
themselves bulk food shall be provided suitable dispensing utensils. 
Dispensing utensils shall be:
      (1)   Stored in the food with the dispensing utensil handle extended out
of the food;
      (2)    Stored clean and dry in a place free from contamination;
   (3)   Stored in potable running water with sufficient water velocity to
agitate and float-off loose particles into the overflow.
   (t)   Food Promotion and Demonstration Samples.  When food sample
demonstrations and food promotions are carried out in food establishments, the
person in charge shall ensure that such promotional activities comply with
applicable sanitation provisions of this chapter.
   (u)   Food Transport By Food Establishment.  Food, other than hanging primal
cuts, quarters or sides of meat, and raw fruits and raw vegetables, shall be
protected from contamination by use of packaging or covered containers while
being transported.  All food being transported shall meet the applicable
requirements of this chapter relating to food protection and food storage. 
Food packaged in immediate closed containers do not need to be overwrapped or
covered if immediate closed containers have not been opened, torn or broken.
      (Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
1711.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation
or order promulgated thereunder shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
 
   (b)   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense on
each successive day such violation continues.
(Ord. 89-20.  Passed 1-10-89.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1715
Meat and Meat Products
 
1715.01   Sale permit required.
1715.02   Sanitation requirements for vending meat.
1715.03   Protection of meat used for food.
1715.04   Sanitation requirements for premises.
1715.05   Refrigeration requirements.
1715.06   Personal cleanliness; sterilization; testing methods.
1715.07   Food unfit for human consumption prohibited.
1715.08   Food from animals which died    diseased or by accident.
1715.09   Inspection of property where food is sold.
1715.10   Food offered for sale.
1715.11   Condemnation and destruction of unwholesome food.
1715.12   Harmful preservatives and adulterants.
1715.13   Transporting bound animals prohibited.
1715.14   Stuffing poultry.
1715.15   Housing and sale of poultry.
1715.16   Additions or remodeling buildings.
1715.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Food processing places to be kept sanitary - see Ohio R.C. 913.41 et seq.
Horse meat - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 919
Marketing standards - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 925
State inspections - see Ohio R.C. 925.11, 3715.61, 3715.70
Animal diseases - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 941
Disposal of dead animals - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 953, 3767.12
Selling diseased animals - see Ohio R.C. 959.05 et seq.
Board of Health power to inspect - see Ohio R.C. 3707.33, 3707.36, 3709.22
Board may require permit to vend milk or meat; fees - see Ohio R.C. 3707.34
Adulterated, misbranded and unsafe food - see Ohio R.C. 3715.52, 3715.59 et
seq.
Meat standards - see OAC 901:3-31
1715.01  SALE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall vend meat, meat products, meat-food products, fish, game or
poultry, wholesale or retail, in the City unless he first obtains a vending
permit from the Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 70-30.  Passed 2-24-70.)
1715.02  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR VENDING MEAT.
   All vending of meats or meat-food products shall be done in a strictly
sanitary manner; the carriers shall be clean and the handling of meats shall
not be permitted by the vendor. 
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.03  PROTECTION OF MEAT USED FOR FOOD.
   The body of any animal or fowl, or part thereof, which is to be used for
food, shall not be carted or carried through the streets or avenues of the City
unless it is covered so as to protect it from dust and dirt.  No meat, poultry,
game or fish shall be hung or exposed for sale in any street or outside of any
shop or store, or in the open windows and doorways thereof, in the City.  At
all times meat, poultry, game or fish on the market shall be protected from
flies, dust and dirt by a glass cover.
   No person shall display any poultry, game or meat of any kind for sale,
unless it is protected by glass or other substantial material necessary and to
the proper heights, also extending over the counter at least ten inches, so as
to keep the general public from handling the different named articles of food
before they are sold to them.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.04  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES.
   Each butcher or other person occupying or using any room or building where
any cattle are slaughtered, dressed for market or stored shall cause such room
or building, and all appurtenances thereto, to be thoroughly cleansed, and all
offal, blood, fat, garbage, refuse and unwholesome or offensive matter to be
removed therefrom once every twenty-four hours
after the use thereof for any purpose herein mentioned.  Such room or building
shall be well drained into a sewer or other place acceptable to the inspector.
   All butchers, meat, poultry and fish dealers shall keep their stores,
salesrooms, market stalls, slaughterhouses and all appurtenances thereunto in a
clean and sanitary condition and provide proper drainage, light and ventilation
for the same.  All meat, meat-food products, poultry, game and fish intended
for human food shall be protected from flies and other insects.  Rats, mice and
other vermin shall be excluded.
   For fish handling, floors shall be of impervious material and all work
tables shall have a cover of metal or other impervious material.
   No basement of any building shall be used for keeping, holding, slaughtering
or dressing any poultry, rabbits, fish, game or other livestock.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.05  REFRIGERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All meat, game or poultry offered for sale in the City shall be kept under
refrigeration, or removed to a refrigerator at the close of each day.
   No meat dealer or butcher shall keep meat, meat products, meat-food
products, fish, game or poultry in any refrigerator or ice box unless the same
shall be lined with some impervious material or other proper substance so as to
be watertight; nor unless the same is provided with drainage as prescribed in
the Building Code of the City, and the same shall be kept clean and in a
sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.06  PERSONAL CLEANLINESS; STERILIZATION; TESTING METHODS.
   All persons engaged in the handling of meat, meat-food products, fish, game
or poultry shall maintain their bodies and clothing in a cleanly manner.  Knife
scabbards shall be kept clean.
   Butchers and others who dress or handle diseased carcasses or parts shall,
before handling or dressing other carcasses or parts, cleanse their hands of
grease, immerse them in a prescribed disinfectant and rinse them in clean
water.  Implements used in dressing diseased carcasses shall be thoroughly
cleansed in boiling water or in a prescribed disinfectant, followed by rinsing
in clean water.  The employees of the establishment who handle any meat or
product shall keep their hands clean, and in all cases, after visiting the
toilet rooms or urinals, shall wash their hands before handling any meat or
product or implements used in the preparation of the same.
   Such practices as spitting on whetstones, placing skewers or knives in the
mouth, inflating lungs or casings or testing with air from the mouth such
receptacles as tierces, kegs, casks and the like, containing or intended as
containers of any meat or products, are prohibited.  Only mechanical means may
be used for testing.  Care shall be taken to prevent the contamination of meats
and products with perspiration.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.07  FOOD UNFIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall bring into the City or sell, expose or offer for sale in any
market, public or private, any cattle, sheep, swine or lamb, or any meat, fish,
game or poultry that is diseased, unsound, unwholesome or that for any other
reason is unfit for human food.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.08  FOOD FROM ANIMALS WHICH DIED DISEASED OR BY ACCIDENT.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale for human food or keep in any market,
public or private, in the City, any cased, blown, raised, stuffed, nauseous,
putrid, impure, unhealthy or unwholesome meats, meat products, meat-food
products, fish, game or poultry or the meat of any animal that may have died of
any disease or accident.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.09  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY WHERE FOOD IS SOLD.
   No person owning or having control of any shop, stall, ice chest or other
place where meat, meat products, meat-food products, fish, game or poultry is
kept for sale shall refuse permission to an inspector to enter and inspect the
same and if necessary, condemn and order the same to be removed immediately.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.10  FOOD OFFERED FOR SALE.
   The fact that any cattle, sheep, swine or lamb are in a stockyard,
slaughterhouse, pen or crate shall be considered sufficient evidence that the
same are being offered for sale; and the fact that the carcasses of any cattle,
sheep, swine or lamb or any part thereof, are found in any public or private
marketplace, dressed and prepared as such meat usually is for market, shall be
deemed as sufficient evidence that the same are on sale.  No animal or part
thereof, or any fish, game or poultry that has been examined and condemned by
an inspector shall be held, sold or offered for human food in the City. 
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.11  CONDEMNATION AND DESTRUCTION OF UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   Upon any meat, meat products, meat-food products, fish, game or poultry
being found by an inspector in a condition which renders them in his opinion,
unwholesome or unfit for use as human food, he is empowered, authorized and
directed to immediately condemn the same and cause them to be destroyed or
rendered unfit for human food, and to report his action in the prescribed
manner to the Chief Dairy and Food Inspector.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-60.)
 
1715.12  HARMFUL PRESERVATIVES AND ADULTERANTS.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any meat, meat products, meat-food
products, fish, game or poultry containing any harmful preservatives such as
boric acid, borates, aniline dyes, sulphurs, sulfites, benzoates,
formaldehydes, permanganate of potash or other harmful ingredients; nor shall
any meat products, meat, meat-food products, fish, game or poultry be sold or
offered for sale which contains any adulterant used to change its color or
appearance for the purpose of disguising its quality or to make it appear of
better quality than it really is, except only such preservatives or coloring as
are permitted by the Federal meat inspection regulations.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.13  TRANSPORTING BOUND ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall transport any cattle, swine, sheep, lambs, calves or poultry
while bound or tied by the legs or bound down in any manner, in any vehicle in
the City.  Such animals shall be allowed to freely stand in any vehicle while
transported and being therein. 
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.14  STUFFING POULTRY.
   Poultry offered for sale, alive or dressed, shall not be stuffed with food,
water or other material to such a degree that unusual weight is added.  This
practice shall be construed as a "fraudulent practice" and shall be prosecuted
under this chapter. 
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.15  HOUSING AND SALE OF POULTRY.
   All establishments, either wholesale or retail, engaged in the handling of
live poultry shall provide clean, well ventilated quarters for housing the
same.  No person shall sell or offer for sale or hold in his possession sick,
injured, emaciated or otherwise unmerchantable or unwholesome poultry for sale.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.16  ADDITIONS OR REMODELING BUILDINGS.
   All plans for new additions, remodeling or new buildings where meat, meat
products, meat-food products, fish, game or poultry are handled or are to be
handled or processed and sold in the City shall first be submitted to the
Department of Public Health for its approval.
(Ord. 3057.  Passed 6-23-30.)
 
1715.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to any
provision thereof or fails to obey any officer charged with the enforcement of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.  Each day on
which such person continues to violate any provision of this chapter after
having been notified of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1717
Food Service Operations
 
1717.01   Laws adopted; identity and purpose.
1717.02   Inspection and sale copies.
1717.03   Annual license fee.
1717.04   Enforcement and right of entry.
1717.05   Sanitation requirements.
1717.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Food service operations to be kept sanitary - see Ohio R.C. 913.41 et seq.
Annual inspection by Board of Health - see Ohio R.C. 3709.22, 3732.05 et seq.
Adulterated, misbranded and unsafe food - see Ohio R.C. 3715.52, 3715.59 et
seq.
Serving imitation butter or cheese - see Ohio R.C. 3717.15
Required marking of oleomargarine serving - see Ohio R.C. 3717.19
Selling unwholesome provisions - see Ohio R.C. 3715.21
Food services operation - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3732; OAC Ch. 3701-21
Packaging and labeling - see OAC Ch. 901:6-3
 
1717.01  LAWS ADOPTED; IDENTITY AND PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 731.231, Chapter 3701-21, Food
Service Operations, of the Ohio Administrative Code relative to food service
operations and the regulations of the Ohio Public Health Council issued
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3732.02 are hereby adopted by the City, and incorporated
by reference as if fully set out herein.  The purpose of the adopted Food
Service Operations Law and Regulations is to provide regulations of general
application throughout the City governing food service operations and to
provide uniform sanitation standards and approval of plans, equipment and
supplies to that portion of any premises utilized for the food service
operation.
 
1717.02  INSPECTION AND SALE COPIES.
   A complete copy of the Food Service Operations Law and Regulations, as
adopted herein, is on file with the City Clerk and the Department of Health for
inspection by the public and a complete copy is also on file in the County Law
Library.  The Department of Health has copies available for distribution to the
public at cost.
 
1717.03  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.
   An annual license fee shall be levied upon each food service operation in
the City in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3732.04.
 
1717.04  ENFORCEMENT AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Department of Health shall enforce the Food Service Operations Law and
Regulations, as adopted herein, and authorized employees in the performance of
official duties shall have authority, upon proper identification, to enter any
building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour to make inspections and
ascertain compliance with such law and regulations.
 
1717.05  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No person owning, operating or participating in the operation of any
restaurant, hotel or other food service operation, while pursuing such
occupation or employment, shall, either personally or by agent or servant,
engage in the handling of food, drink or utensils used in connection therewith
without observing and complying with the following requirements.
   (a)   All wearing apparel shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   (b)   Hair shall be kept controlled and in order, by means of a cap, net,
band or other device or material, so as to prevent the same from falling into
or upon any such food, drink, utensils or equipment.
         (Ord. 72-1.  Passed 1-4-72.)
 
1717.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or the Food Service
Operations Law and Regulations as adopted herein, or any lawful order of an
authorized employee of the Department of Health issued pursuant thereto, or
whoever obstructs or interferes with the execution of such order or willfully
or illegally omits to obey such order, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  Any
such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day
continued.
 
 
 
TITLE THREE - Sanitation
Chap.
1731.  Littering.
Chap.
1733.  Expectoration.
Chap.
1735.  Animals.
Chap.
1737.  Rat Control.
Chap.
1741.  Hazardous Substances.
Chap.
1743.  Swimming Pools.
Chap.
1745.  Child Day Care Operations.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1731
Littering
 
1731.01   Definitions.
1731.02   Depositing litter on private premises.
1731.03   Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
1731.04   Notice to remove litter.
1731.05   Action upon noncompliance.
1731.06   Written return to County Auditor; amount of lien.
1731.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Removal of litter - see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
Litter control - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1502
Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk - see GEN. OFF.
521.08
Garbage and rubbish collection - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
919
 
1731.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
 
   (b)   "Litter" means "garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
 
   (c)   "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
 
   (d)   "Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building or any other
structure used or designed to be used either wholly or in part for residential
or commercial purposes, whether in use or vacant and includes any yard, walk,
grounds, driveway or parking area belonging to or appurtenant to such
structure, building, dwelling or house.
 
   (e)   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals
and solid market and industrial wastes.
 
   (f)   "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials. 
(Ord. 68-43.  Passed 3-18-68.)
 
1731.02  DEPOSITING LITTER ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the
City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in
control of private premises may maintain private receptacles for collection in
such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private premises. 
(Ord. 68-43.  Passed 3-18-68.)
 
1731.03  OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter.  However, this section shall not prohibit
the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection.
(Ord. 68-43.  Passed 3-18-68.)
 
1731.04  NOTICE TO REMOVE LITTER.
   The Health Commissioner shall cause notice to be issued to the owner of any
open or vacant private premises located within the City or the agent of such
owner, to dispose of litter located on such premises which is dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare.  Such notice shall be by certified mail
addressed to such owner or agent at his last known address.  In the event the
address of the owner or other person having charge of such land is unknown, it
shall be sufficient to publish such notice once in a newpaper of general
circulation in the County.
(Ord. 69-70.  Passed 5-5-69.)
 
1731.05  ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Upon the failure of any owner or agent to comply with such notice as
provided in Section
1731.04 within five days after receipt of such notification, or within ten days
after the date of such notice if unclaimed by the addressee, or within ten days
after the date such notice is published as provided in Section
1731.04, the City Manager shall employ the necessary labor to perform
compliance with the notice. 
(Ord. 68-43.  Passed 3-18-68.)
 
1731.06  WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR; AMOUNT OF LIEN.
   The City Manager shall make a written return to the County Auditor of his
action under Sections
1731.04 and
1731.05, with a statement of the charges for services, together with a
description of the premises.  Such amount shall be entered upon the tax
duplicate and shall be a lien upon such lands for the date of entry, and shall
be collected as other taxes and returned to the City with the General Fund. 
(Ord. 68-43.  Passed 3-18-68.)
 
1731.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  When litter which was the cause of a prosecution brought
pursuant to this chapter has not been properly disposed of, such violator may
be required to properly dispose of same or both.  Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1733
Expectoration
 
1733.01   Spitting in public places prohibited.
1733.02   Spitting in public conveyances prohibited.
1733.99   Penalty.
 
1733.01  SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall spit upon the sidewalk of any street, alley or other public
place, or upon the floor, walls or seats of any room, hall, office or other
part of any tenement, hotel or lodging place, which is used in common by the
guests or inmates thereof, or upon the floor, walls or other part of any store,
theater or other building or room which is used in common by the public.
(1969 Code Sec. 833.01)
 
1733.02  SPITTING IN PUBLIC CONVEYANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall spit upon the floor, seats, walls or other part of any
public conveyance.
(1969 Code Sec. 833.02)
 
1733.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1735
Animals
 
1735.01   Keeping hogs prohibited without consent.
1735.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Animal regulations generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
505
Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
505.10
Offensive odors from place where animal kept or fed - see GEN. OFF.
521.09
1735.01  KEEPING HOGS PROHIBITED WITHOUT CONSENT.
   No person shall keep any hog within the City, except with the written
consent of the Health Commissioner and upon such terms and conditions as he may
prescribe. 
(1969 Code Sec. 835.01)
 
1735.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1737
Rat Control
 
1737.01   Definitions.
1737.02   Business buildings to be rat-free.
1737.03   Notice to owners of buildings.
1737.04   Notice to occupants of buildings.
1737.05   Maintenance and repair of ratproofing.
1737.06   Construction or repair where food kept to render building ratproofed.
1737.07   Storage of animal feed.
1737.08   Garbage containers to withstand rat gnawing.
1737.09   Dumping carcass or garbage on land or water prohibited.
1737.10   Trash accumulations which afford rat harborage prohibited.
1737.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Ratproofing - see OAC 4101:2-8-08
 
1737.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Business building" means any structure, whether public or private,
that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods,
wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including
hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings,
public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators,
abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and
other structures on premises used for business purposes.
   (b)   "Ratproofing", as used herein, applies to a form of construction to
prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from
one business building or establishment to another.  It consists essentially of
treating with material, impervious to rat gnawing, all actual or potential
openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roof and
foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by
burrowing.
   (c)   "Rat harborage" means any condition which provides shelter or
protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence
in, under or outside of any structure.
   (d)   "Rat eradication" means the elimination or extermination of rats
within buildings by any or all of the accepted measures, such as:  poisoning,
fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc.
   (e)   "Commissioner", as used herein, means the Commissioner of Public
Health or any duly authorized representative thereof.
   (f)   "Owner" means the actual owner, agent or custodian of the business
building, whether an individual, partnership or corporation.  The lessee shall
be construed as the owner for the purpose of this chapter when business
building agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
   (g)   "Occupant", as used herein, means the individual, partnership or
corporation that uses or occupies any business building or part thereof,
whether the actual owner or tenant.  In the case of vacant business buildings
or vacant portions thereof, the owner, agent or custodian shall have the
responsibility as occupant.
      (Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.02  BUSINESS BUILDINGS TO BE RAT-FREE.
   All business buildings shall be ratproofed, freed of rats or maintained in a
rat-free condition in accordance with the following sections and with any and
all regulations of the Commissioner issued pursuant to the following sections.
(Ord. 5323.  Passed 5-12-52.)
 
1737.03  NOTICE TO OWNERS OF BUILDINGS.
   Whenever conditions inside or under any business buildings provide harborage
for rats, or whenever there is evidence of rat infestation of any business
building, the Commissioner shall give written notice to the owner of such
business building requiring the owner to take immediate measures for
ratproofing the building or to take immediate measures for rat eradication in
such building or to take both such immediate measures, and to fix the time for
compliance with such written notice. 
(Ord. 5323.  Passed 5-12-52.)
 
1737.04  NOTICE TO OCCUPANTS OF BUILDINGS.
   Whenever conditions inside or under any business buildings provide harborage
for rats, or whenever there is evidence of rat infestation of any business
building, the Commissioner shall give written notice to the occupant or
occupants of the business building requiring such occupant or occupants to take
immediate measures for ratproofing the building or to take immediate measures
for rat eradication in such building, or to take both such immediate measures,
and to fix the time for compliance with the written notice.
(Ord. 5323.  Passed 5-12-52.)
 
1737.05  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF RATPROOFING.
   The owners of all ratproofed business buildings shall maintain the premises
in a ratproof condition and repair all breakes or leaks that may occur in the
ratproofing. 
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.06  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR WHERE FOOD KEPT TO RENDER BUILDING RATPROOFED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall hereinafter undertake any major
construction, repair or remodeling of any business building wherein foodstuffs
are stored, kept, handled or sold, unless such construction, repair and
remodeling shall be performed in such a manner as to render the building
ratproof.
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.07  STORAGE OF ANIMAL FEED.
   No person shall store any food or feed within the City for feeding chickens,
cows, pigs, horses and other animals in any container other than rat-free or
ratproof containers, compartments or rooms unless such food or feed is stored
in a ratproofed building.
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.08  GARBAGE CONTAINERS TO WITHSTAND RAT GNAWING.
   No person shall place or store any garbage or refuse consisting of waste
animal or vegetable matter upon which rats may feed, or any small dead animals,
in any container and on any premises for collection other than in a covered
container which is constructed of a material which is impervious to rat
gnawing.
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.09  DUMPING CARCASS OR GARBAGE ON LAND OR WATER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall dump or place on any premises, land or waterway any dead
animals or waste vegetable or animal matter of any kind.
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.10  TRASH ACCUMULATIONS WHICH AFFORD RAT HARBORAGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or
upon any open lot, street or alley within the City, any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bottles, cans, containers or similar materials, the accumulation of which
materials afford harborage for rats.
(Ord. 5243.  Passed 10-29-51.)
 
1737.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or assists in the violation of any provision of this
chapter or any order or regulation of the Commissioner made pursuant to any
provision of this chapter, or obstructs or interferes with the execution of any
such order of the Commissioner or willfully or unlawfully omits to obey such
order of the Commissioner is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
However, no person shall be imprisoned under this section for the first
offense, and the prosecution shall always be as and for a first offense, unless
an affidavit upon which the prosecution is instituted contains the allegation
that the offense is a second or repeated offense.
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1741
Hazardous Substances
 
1741.01   Definitions.
1741.02   Disposal of hazardous waste.
1741.03   Disposal and storage of PCB or PCBs.
1741.04   Use of PCB or PCBs.
1741.05   Transportation and shipment of radioactive material.
1741.06   Application of other regulatory provisions.
1741.07   Exemptions.
1741.08   Inspections.
1741.09   Right of entry.
1741.10   Injunctive relief.
1741.99   Penalty.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Labeling of hazardous wastes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3716
Hazardous wastes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3734
 
1741.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
   (a)   "Hazardous substances" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any hazardous waste.
      (2)   Any radioactive material.
      (3)   Any chemical substance listed below, or mixture containing any
chemical substances listed below:
         PCB or PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyl)
   (b)   "Hazardous waste" means any waste or combination of wastes which pose
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or living organisms
because such wastes are nondegradable or persistent in nature or because they
can be biologically magnified, or because they can be lethal or because they
may otherwise cause or tend to cause detrimental cumulative effects, including
any substance, combination of substances or mixtures as defined as "hazardous
waste" in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 40, Part 261, Subpart A
261.3 which is not specifically excluded under 261.4(b) under such Title or
this chapter of the Codified Ordinances.  The provisions of 40 CFR Part 261,
Subpart A 261.2, 261.3 and 261.4, and corresponding sections of Subparts C and
D and appendices cited therein, which define, describe and identify hazardous
waste are hereby incorporated by reference into this section and made a part
hereof the same as if each were set forth fully herein.  All subsequent
amendments to such provisions of Subparts C and D and appendices cited therein
which define, describe and identify hazardous waste, and the section of Subpart
B specifically delineated herein, automatically become a part of this section
as of the effective dates of each amendment, subject to the provisions of this
section.  Hazardous wastes do not include chemical substances or mixtures
listed in Section
1741.01(a)(3) hereof or any radioactive material.
   (c)   "PCB" and "PCBs" means any chemical substance that is limited to the
biphenyl molecule that has been chlorinated to varying degrees or any
combination of substances, or mixture which contains chlorinated biphenyl
molecules.
   (d)   "PCB article" means any manufactured article other than a PCB
container that contains PCBs and whose surface(s) has been in direct contact
with PCBs.  "PCB article" includes capacitors, transformers, electric motors,
pumps, pipes and any other manufactured item
      (1)   which is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture;
      (2)   which has end use function(s) dependent in whole or in part upon
its shape or design during end use; and
      (3)   which has either no change of chemical composition during its end
use or only those changes of composition which have no commercial purpose
separate from that of the PCB article.
   (e)   "PCB equipment" means any manufactured item, other than a PCB
container or a PCB article container, which contains a PCB article or other PCB
equipment and includes microwave ovens, electronic equipment and fluorescent
light ballasts and fixtures.
   (f)   "PCB container" means any package, can, bottle, barrel, drum, tank or
other device exclusive of a PCB article or PCB equipment that contains a PCB or
PCBs article and whose surface(s) has been in direct contact with PCBs.
   (g)   "Chemical substance" except as provided in subsection (3) hereof,
means any organic or inorganic substance of a particular molecular identity,
including:
      (1)   Any combination of such substances occurring in whole or part as a
result of a chemical reaction or occurring in nature, and
      (2)   Any element or uncombined radical.
      (3)   Such term does not include:
         A.   Any mixture;
         B.   Any pesticide, as defined in the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide
and Rodenticide Act, when manufactured, processed or distributed in commerce
for use as a pesticide;
         C.   Tobacco or any tobacco product;
         D.   Any source material, special nuclear material, or by-product
material, as such terms are defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, and regulations issued under such Act, and the Energy Reorganization
Act of 1974 and any regulations issued under such Act;
         E.   Any article the sale of which is subject to the tax imposed by
Section 4181 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, determined without regard to
any exemptions from such tax provided by Section 4182 or Section 4221 or any
provisions of such Code; and
         F.   Any food, food additive, drug, cosmetic, or device, as such terms
are defined in Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, when
manufactured, processed or distributed in commerce for use as a food, food
additive, drug, cosmetic or device.
   (h)   "Mixture" means any combination of two or more chemical substances if
the combination does not occur in nature and is not, in whole or in part, the
result of a chemical reaction; except that "mixture" includes any combination
which occurs, in whole or in part, as a result of a chemical reaction if none
of the chemical substances comprising the combination is a new chemical
substance and if the combination could have been manufactured for commercial
purposes without a chemical reaction at the time the chemical substances
comprising the combination were combined.
   (i)   "By-product" means a chemical substance produced without separate
commercial intent during the manufacturing or processing of another chemical
substance(s) or mixture(s).
   (j)   "Use" means putting into service to attain an end other than disposal.
   (k)   "Store for disposal" means to store, confine or contain for or
incidental to discarding, destroying, decontaminating, degrading, reprocessing
or recycling of substances whose useful lives have been terminated or
completed, or which have otherwise been taken out of service.
   (l)   "Person" means any natural or legally created artificial person
including any individual, corporation, partnership or association.  "Person"
includes any individual, partnership, association or corporation engaged in the
transportation of passengers or property, as common, contract or private
carrier, or freight forwarder, as those terms are used in the Interstate
Commerce Act, as amended.
   (m)   "Radioactive material" means any material or combination of materials,
which spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.  Materials in which the estimated
specific activity is not greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram of material,
and in which the radioactivity is essentially uniformly distributed, are not
considered to be radioactive materials.
   (n)   "Curie" means an expression of the quantity of radiation in terms of
the number of atoms which disintegrate per second; a curie is that quantity of
radioactive material which decays such that thirty-seven billion atoms
disintegrate per second.
   (o)   "Microcurie" means one millionth of a curie.
   (p)   "Waste oil" means used products primarily derived from petroleum,
which include, but are not limited to, fuel oils, motor oils, gear oils,
cutting oils, transmission fluids, hydraulic fluids and dielectric fluids.
   (q)   "Hazardous substance disposal site" means any chemical waste landfill
or incinerator used to dispose of hazardous substances.
   (r)   "Chemical waste landfill" means a landfill at which protection against
risk of injury to health or the environment from migration of hazardous
substances to land, water or the atmosphere is provided from hazardous
substances deposited therein by locating, engineering and operating the
landfill in accordance with Federal and State law.
      (Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.02  DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discard, dispose, discharge, deposit,
inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any
land, whether improved or unimproved, upon any public or private street,
roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer or culvert, into any lake,
pond, watercourse or ditch, or into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of
any aquifer, any hazardous waste within the corporate limits of the City.
 
   (b)   No person shall knowingly cause any other persons by contract or
otherwise to discard, dispose, discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak,
spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any land, whether improved or
unimproved, upon any public or private street, roadway or highway, into any
drain, gutter, sewer or culvert, into any lake, pond, watercourse or ditch, or
into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of any aquifer, any hazardous waste
within the corporate limits of the City.
 
   (c)   No person shall negligently discard, dispose, discharge, deposit,
inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any
land, whether improved or unimproved, upon any public or private street,
roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer or culvert, into any lake,
pond, watercourse or ditch, or into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of
any aquifer, any hazardous waste within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.03  DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF PCB OR PCBS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discard, dispose, discharge, deposit,
inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any
land, whether improved or unimproved, upon any public or private street,
roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer or culvert, into any lake,
pond, watercourse or ditch, or into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of
any aquifer, any PCB or PCBs either in liquid, crystalline or solid resin form,
within the corporate limits of the City.
 
   (b)   No person shall knowingly cause any person by contract or otherwise to
discard, dispose, discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place
or otherwise cast into or upon any land, whether improved or unimproved, upon
any public or private street, roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer
or culvert, into any lake, pond, watercourse or ditch, or into any pit or
excavation, or into or atop of any aquifer, any PCB or PCBs either in liquid,
crystalline or solid resin form, within the corporate limits of the City.
 
   (c)   No person shall negligently discard, dispose, discharge, deposit,
inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any
land, whether improved or unimproved, upon any public or private street,
roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer or culvert, into any lake,
pond, watercourse or ditch, or into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of
any aquifer, any PCB or PCBs either in liquid, crystalline or solid resin form,
within the corporate limits of the City.
 
   (d)   After October 1, 1983, no person shall store for disposal any PCB or
PCBs, regardless of form, in one or more PCB containers, within the corporate
limits of the City at any of the following locations:
      (1)   Within the Fire Zone, within any floodplain, atop any aquifer or
within any drainage basin of any aquifer, lake or pond;
      (2)   Any other location not enumerated in subsection (d)(1) hereof.
 
   (e)   After October 1, 1983, no person shall cause any other person by
contract or otherwise to store for disposal any PCB or PCBs, regardless of
form, in one or more PCB containers, within the corporate limits of the City at
any of the following locations:
      (1)   Within the Fire Zone, within any floodplain, atop any aquifer or
within any drainage basin of any aquifer, lake or pond;
      (2)   Any other location not enumerated in subsection (e)(1) hereof.
 
   (f)   (1)   "PCB" and "PCBs" as used in this section means any chemical
substance, combination of substances or mixture that contains fifty parts per
million, on a dry weight basis, or greater of PCBs, as defined in Section
1741.01(c) hereof including any by-product, intermediate or impurity
manufactured at any point in the process.
      (2)   Substances that are regulated by this section include, but are not
limited to, dielectric fluids, contaminated solvents, waste oils, heat transfer
fluids, hydraulic fluids, paints, sludges, slurries, dredge spoils, soils,
materials contaminated as a result of spills and other chemical substances or
combination of substances, or mixtures of substances, including impurities and
by-products, provided, such chemical substances or combination of substances or
mixtures, regardless of form contain PCB or PCBs.
 
   (g)   Storage or use of PCB or PCBs in PCB articles or PCB equipment is not
in violation of this section.  Disposal of PCB articles or PCB equipment
containing any measurable amount of PCB or PCBs therein is not a violation of
this section. 
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.04  USE OF PCB OR PCBS.
   (a)   No person shall use any PCB or PCBs other than in the manufacturing or
processing of other substances or mixtures, or in PCB articles, PCB equipment
or incidental to placing into service or continuing service of PCB articles or
PCB equipment.
 
   (b)   The prohibitions of subsection (a) hereof shall be subject to the
exemptions set forth in Section
1741.07(b) of this chapter.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.05  TRANSPORTATION AND SHIPMENT OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.
   No person shall ship or transport into, within, through or out of the City
any radioactive material contrary to the applicable Federal regulations of the
Department of Transportation and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in effect at
the date of shipment or transport.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.06  APPLICATION OF OTHER REGULATORY PROVISIONS.
   Regardless and notwithstanding the provisions of Section
1741.03, any and all applicable provisions, ordinances and regulations
requiring permits for the storage of any hazardous materials are still in full
force and effect unless otherwise specifically repealed. 
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.07  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the storage or
disposal of hazardous waste and PCB or PCBs in any hazardous substance disposal
site specifically approved by either the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and which comport to Federal and
State law.
 
   (b)   A person may petition the City Manager or his designee for an
exemption from the requirement of Section
1741.04(a), and the City Manager or his designee may grant in writing an
exemption, where not precluded by State or Federal law, if he finds that:
      (1)   Unreasonable risk of injury to health or environment would not
result;
      (2)   Good faith efforts have been made to develop a chemical substance
which does not present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the
environment and which may be substituted for such PCB;
      (3)   The best interests of the City would be served by granting the
exemption.
 
   (c)   The provisions of Sections
1741.03 and
1741.04 shall not apply to the use of waste samples of PCB or PCBs, samples of
other substances or material containing PCB or PCBs, or PCB or PCBs reference
samples for or in conducting analytical tests to determine the composition or
characteristics of the sample.
 
   (d)   The provisions of Section
1741.02 shall not apply to the discharge of wastewater or wastewater
derivatives authorized under a valid National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit, or otherwise authorized to be discharged into a publicly-owned
water treatment works.
 
   (e)   The provisions of Section
1741.03(d) shall not aply to the temporary storage of PCB or PCBs taken out of
service, provided:
      (1)   The temporary storage does not exceed sixty days from the date that
the PCB or PCBs are taken out of service;
      (2)   The PCB or PCBs being temporarily stored were previously placed
into use and taken out of service within the corporate limits of the City or
removed from service by a person lawfully using the PCB or PCBs within the
corporate limits of the City;
      (3)   The PCB or PCBs being temporarily stored remain in the possession,
custody, control or ownership of the person who used the PCB or PCBs;
      (4)   The previous use of the PCB or PCBs being temporarily stored was
lawful;
      (5)   The date or dates that the PCB or PCBs were taken out of service
and an indication that the containerized substance or mixture is a  PCB or PCBs
are clearly and indelibly marked on each respective storage container utilized
whether a "PCB container", other container or receptacle.  The date so marked
shall be prima facie evidence of the date the PCB or PCBs were taken out of
service.
 
   (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (e) hereof, the
provisions of Section
1741.03(d) shall not apply to the temporary storage or temporary accumulation
of a PCB or PCBs taken out of service and being temporarily stored or
temporarily accumulated, on or after January 1, 1983, and prior to the
effective date of this chapter, which storage or accumulation is prior to the
movement of the PCB or PCBs off-site for disposal at another location outside
the corporate limits of the City, provided:
      (1)   The incidental temporary storage or accumulation does not exceed
sixty days from the date that the respective PCB or PCBs were taken out of
service; and
      (2)   Effective October 1, 1983, the date or dates the PCB or PCBs were
taken out of service are clearly and indelibly marked on each respective
storage container utilized whether a "PCB container" or other container, or
receptacle in which the PCB or PCBs are being temporarily stored or temporarily
accumulated, together with a clear and indelible indication that the particular
containerized substance or mixture is a PCB or PCBs.  The date or dates so
marked shall be prima facie evidence of the date or dates the PCB or PCBs were
taken out of service.
         (Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
   (g)   The provisions of Section
1741.03(d)(2) shall not apply to the storage of a PCB or PCBs taken out of
service, provided:
      (1)   That not more than 2,000 gallons of a PCB or PCBs may be stored by
any one person within the City;
      (2)   That the PCB or PCBs being stored remain in the possession,
custody, control or ownership of the person who used the PCB or PCBs;
      (3)   That the previous use of the PCB or PCBs being stored was lawful;
      (4)   That the PCB or PCBs being stored were previously placed into use
and taken out of service within the corporate limits of the City or removed
from service by a person lawfully using a  PCB or PCBs within the corporate
limits of the City;
      (5)   That the substance being stored contain not more than 500 parts per
million, on a dry weight basis, of the PCB or PCBs including any by-product,
intermediate or impurity manufactured at any point in the process;
      (6)   That the PCB or PCBs be stored in a solid steel container
completely enclosed in reinforced concrete and that the storage site be secured
against acts of trespass, theft and vandalism;
      (7)   That the solid steel container in which the PCB or PCBs are being
stored is emptied at least once every six months, and that the contents thereof
be safely removed and disposed of at a hazardous substance disposal site;
      (8)   That the solid steel container in which the PCB or PCBs are being
stored be inspected to determine its continued safe use at least once every
year and that the City Manager be given written notice of any such inspection
at least ten days in advance thereof;
      (9)   That upon the abandonment or discontinuance of use of any such
solid steel container in which the PCB or PCBs have been or are being stored,
the contents thereof, if any, together with the solid steel container and
reinforced concrete enclosure be safely removed and disposed of at a hazardous
substance disposal site. 
(Ord. 85-642.  Passed 11-19-85.)
 
1741.08  INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Chief or his designated representative, any law enforcement officer
or building, housing or zoning inspector shall have the authority to inspect
all structures and premises as often as may be necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining or causing to be corrected, any condition which may be a violation
of this chapter, or otherwise enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.09  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, or whenever the Fire Chief or his designated representative, any law
enforcement officer or any building, housing or zoning inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any
condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, such officials may
enter the structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, or
to perform any duty imposed upon any of such respective officials by law;
provided, that if such structure or premises are occupied, he shall first
present proper credentials and request entry.  If such entry is refused, the
official seeking entry shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to
secure entry.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.10  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   Violation of the provisions of Sections
1741.02 and
1741.03 shall constitute a public nuisance.  The Director of Law shall have the
authority to commence any action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin
the actions of any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections
1741.02 and
1741.03.
(Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
1741.99  PENALTY.
   The following criminal penalties apply to this chapter:
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
1741.02(a) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
1741.02(b) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
1741.02(c) shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(a) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (e)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(b) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (f)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(c) shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor.
   (g)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(d)(1) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.  If any violation
of Section
1741.03(d)(1) is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (h)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(d)(2) shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor.  If any violation
of Section
1741.03(d)(2) is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (i)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(e)(1) shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (j)   Whoever violates Section
1741.03(e)(2) shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor.
   (k)   Whoever violates Section
1741.04 shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (l)   Whoever violates Section
1741.05 shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (m)   Any individual director, officer or agent of a corporation who
knowingly and willfully authorizes, orders or performs any of the acts
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of Sections
1741.02,
1741.03,
1741.04 or
1741.05 shall be subject to the penalties under this section without regard to
any penalty to which that corporation may be subject for violation of Sections
1741.02,
1741.03,
1741.04 or
1741.05.
      (Ord. 83-309.  Passed 6-28-83.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1743
Swimming Pools
 
1743.01   State law adopted.
1743.02   Inspection fees.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Swimming pools - see OAC Ch. 3701-31; 4101:2-4-23
 
1743.01  STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3749, Swimming Pools and Ohio
Administrative Code Sections 3701-31-01 through 3701-31-10, Public Swimming
Pool, Spa and Special Use Pool Rules, are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 88-171.  Passed 4-5-88.)
 
1743.02  INSPECTION FEES.
   The Board of Health hereby establishes an annual licensing and inspection 
fee for each public swimming pool, public spa or special use pool licensed and
inspected pursuant to this chapter as follows:
 
Indoor pool             $ 287.00
Seasonal pool           156.00
Spa with pool           90.00 plus applicable pool fees.
Single spa without pool 287.00
Each additional spa     60.00
 
   The City Treasurer shall transmit twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of each fee
collected pursuant to this section to the Treasurer of the State.
(Ord. 90-570.  Passed 10-23-90.)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1745
Child Day Care Operations
 
1745.01   Inspections.
1745.02   Inspection fees.
 
CROSS REFERENCES
Child day care - see Ohio R.C. 5104; OAC Ch. 5101:2-12 to 5101:2-16
1745.01  INSPECTIONS.
   The Board of Health May perform health and sanitation inspections of
premises located within the City which are being used or are to be used as
child day care facilities.  Health and sanitation inspections of such child day
care facilities may be requested by entities seeking such inspection to comply
with child care food program regulations promulgated by the United States
Department of Agriculture.
(Ord. 88-400.  Passed 6-28-88.)
 
1745.02  INSPECTION FEES.
   Each entity requesting a health and sanitation inspection of a child day
care facility shall pay to the City an inspection fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each inspection to be performed by the Board of Health.
(Ord. 88-400.  Passed 6-28-88.)
 
