CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF
CITY OF SHELBY, OHIO
2020 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 16, 2019
State legislation current through December 31, 2011
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Editor's note:
   The Charter of the City of Shelby became effective on January 1, 1923. Dates
appearing in parentheses following a section heading in the Table of Contents,
and following a section in the text, indicate that the section was enacted or
amended on the date given.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
The Charter of the City of Shelby, Ohio
   
1,
2   Powers of the city
   
3   The elective officers of the city (1-1-1944; 11-5-2002)
   
4 to
22   The council (11-5-2002; 11-8-2011)
   
23   Administrative powers of the city
   
24 to
30   The Mayor (11-5-1996; 11-5-2002; 5-3-2011)
   
31 to
35   Director of Law (11-5-1996)
   
36 to
38   Director of Finance and Public Record (11-5-1996)
   
39   Accounting procedure
   
40,
41   Accounts
   
42   Payment of claims
   
43 to
45   Treasurer
   
46   Contracts certified
   
47   Contracts, when void
   
48,
49   Establishment of a Police Court and the appointment of a Police Judge (11-
7-2000)
   
50   Public welfare and health
   
51   Sinking Fund
   
52   Civil Service Commission (11-3-2015)
Nomination and Election of Officers
   
53,
53A   Nomination by primary election (1-1-1944; 11-8-1994)
   
54   Nomination by petition
   
55   Regular elections (11-8-1994)
   
56   Special elections
   
57 to
66   The recall
   
67 to
71   The initiative
   
72 to
75   The referendum
Improvements and Assessments
   
76   Local improvements
   
77   Methods of special assessment
   
78   Preliminary assessments (5-2-2006)
   
79   Notices served
   
80   Plans of proposed improvements
   
81   Board of Revision of Assessments
   
82   Claims
   
83   Final assessment
   
84   Damages assessed
   
85   Work to be done
   
86   Lands unallotted or not on duplicate
   
87   Interest on assessment bonds
   
88   Limitation on assessments
   
89   City's portion of cost
   
90   Replacing existing improvements
   
91   Subsequent improvements
   
92   Supplementary assessments and rebates
   
93   Sewer and water connections
   
94   Sidewalks
   
95   Further proceedings unnecessary
   
96   Assessment bonds
   
97   Alterations or modifications in contract (11-5-2002)
   
98   Plat of subdivision
   
99   Fee shall vest in city
   
100   Planning Commissioners (1-1-1964)
   
101   Effect of such platting
   
102   Streets and public grounds
   
103   Alteration of streets
   
104   Dedication of streets
   
105   Vacation or change of name
   
106   Taxation
Appropriation of Property
   
107   Appropriation
   
108   Declaratory resolution
   
109   Notice
   
110   Further proceedings
Franchises
   
111   Grant
   
112,
113   Renewals
   
114   No exclusive grant
   
115   Consents
   
116   Regulations
General Provisions
   
117   Official bonds
   
118,
119   Continuance of present officers
   
120   Oath of office
   
121   Interest in contract or supplies
   
122   Continuance of contracts
   
123   Amendments (6-9-1981)
   
124   When Charter takes effect
The Charter of the City of Shelby, Ohio.
   We, the people of the City of Shelby, in order that we may have the benefits
of municipal home rule and exercise all the powers of local self government, do
frame and adopt this charter for the government of the aforesaid City of
Shelby.
Powers of the City.
   Section 1.   The inhabitants of the city of Shelby, as its limits now are,
or hereafter may be, shall be a body politic and corporate by name The City of
Shelby, and as such shall have perpetual succession; shall succeed to all the
rights and liabilities, shall acquire all benefits and shall assume and pay all
bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said Village of Shelby; may use a
corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property in fee simple or
lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, appropriation, lease or
lease with privilege to purchase, for any municipal purpose; may purchase
options on property for any municipal purpose; may sell, convey, lease, hold,
manage and control such property; and may make any and all rules and
regulations by ordinance or resolution which may be required to carry out fully
all the provisions of any conveyance, deed or will, in relation to any gift or
bequest, or the provision of any lease by which it may acquire property; may
acquire, construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities; may
provide for and maintain public entertainments and amusements; may assess, levy
and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all the subjects or
objects which the city may lawfully tax; may borrow money on the faith and
credit of the city by the issue or sale of bonds, certificates of indebtedness
or notes of the city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful
purposes; may create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things
of the nature of public works and improvements; may levy and collect
assessments for local improvements; may license vehicles; may license and
regulate the business, occupation, profession or trade of all persons,
corporations and associations engaged therein, whether local or transient; may
define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the
health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city, and all nuisances and causes thereof; may regulate the construction
and height of, and the material used in, all buildings, and the maintenance and
occupancy thereof; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of
the streets and other public places; may create, establish, abolish and
organize offices and fix the salaries and compensation of all officers and
employees; may make and enforce local police, sanitary and other regulations;
and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting
the peace, good government and welfare of the city, and for the performance of
the functions thereof. The city shall have all powers that are now, or
hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of Ohio;
and all such powers, whether express or implied, shall be exercised and
enforced in the manner prescribed by this charter, or when not prescribed
herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the
council.
   Section 2.   The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not
be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated
herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall
have and may exercise all other powers which, under the constitution and laws
of Ohio, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate.
The Elective Officers of the City.
   Section 3.   The mayor, one councilmember, the director of law and the
director of finance and public record shall be elected at large. One
councilmember shall be elected from each of the four wards to be voted for by
the electors of the ward from which each councilmember is elected, and the
councilmember at large shall be vice-president of the council.
(Amended 1-1-1944; 11-5-2002)
The Council.
   Section 4.   The legislative powers of the city, except as limited by this
charter, shall be vested in a council of five members, elected as hereinbefore
provided. They shall be elected for a term of two years and shall serve until
their successors are chosen and qualified. Vacancies in the council shall be
filled by the council for the unexpired term. If council fails within thirty
days to fill such vacancy, the mayor shall fill it by appointment, and such
appointment shall not be subject to confirmation by the council.
(Amended 11-5-2002)
   Section 5.   Members of the council shall be resident electors of the city.
Any member who ceases to possess this qualification shall forthwith forfeit his
office.
   Section 6.   The salaries of all elected officers shall be fixed by the out-
going council not later than February 15th in the odd-numbered years. Should
any councilmember be absent from the city or permanently disabled for more than
five consecutive regular meetings, the council may declare the office vacant
and appoint another from the same ward or at large, as the case may be. Except
councilmember at large, each councilmember must be a resident of the ward in
which he is elected or appointed.
(Amended 11-5-2002)
   Section 7.   At seven o’clock p.m. on the first Monday in January, following
a regular municipal election, the council shall meet at the usual place for
holding such meetings, at which time the newly elected council shall assume the
duties of their office. Thereafter the council shall meet at such times as may
be prescribed by ordinance or resolution.
   The mayor, or the vice-president of the council in the absence of the mayor,
or any three members thereof may call special meetings of the council upon
written notice served personally upon each member or at his usual place of
residence, at least six hours previous to time fixed for such meeting. Any such
request for special meeting shall state the subjects to be considered at the
meeting and no other subjects shall be then considered.
   Section 8.   The council shall be the judge of the election and
qualification of its members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a
quorum to do business but a less number may adjourn from day to day and compel
the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may
be prescribed by ordinance. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members
of the council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution and on
the passage thereof a vote shall be taken by "yeas" and "nays" and entered upon
the journal. In the event of a tie vote, the presiding officer of council shall
vote to break the tie unless excused by the consent of council. The council
shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal of
its proceedings. All meetings of the council or committees thereof shall be
conducted in accordance with State law commonly known as "The Open Meetings
Act", and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at
all reasonable times.
(Amended 11-5-2002; 11-8-2011)
   Section 9.   The vice-president, in the absence of the mayor, shall preside
at the meetings of the council and perform such duties as may be imposed by the
council upon him, by ordinance or law.
   Section 10.   The council shall choose such officers and employees of its
own body as are necessary, provided that the director of finance and public
record shall be its clerk without additional compensation therefor.
   The clerk shall keep the records of the council and perform such other
duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution.
   All officers and employees chosen by the council shall serve during the
pleasure thereof.
   Section 11.   Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in
written or printed form, and shall not contain more than one subject which
shall be clearly stated in the title; but general appropriation ordinances may
contain the various subjects and accounts for which moneys are appropriated.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, “Be it
ordained by the council of the city of Shelby, Ohio.”
   The enacting clause of all ordinances submitted to the initiative shall be,
“Be it ordained by the people of the city of Shelby, Ohio.”
   No ordinance or resolution or section thereof shall be revised or amended,
unless the new ordinance or resolution contains the entire ordinance or
resolution or section revised or amended, and the ordinance, resolution,
section or sections so amended shall be repealed.
   Section 12.   Any ordinance or resolution passed by the council shall be
signed by the vice-president and presented to the mayor by the clerk. If the
mayor approves such ordinance or resolution he shall sign it within ten (10)
days after its passage or adoption by the council; but if he does not approve
it, he shall return it to the council with his objections within said ten (10)
days, or if the council be not then in session, at the next regular meeting
thereof, which objections the council shall cause to be entered in full on its
journal. If the mayor does not sign or veto an ordinance or resolution after
its passage or adoption within the time specified, it shall take effect in the
same manner as if he had signed it. The mayor may approve or disapprove the
whole or any item or part of any ordinance or resolution appropriating money.
When the mayor refuses to sign an ordinance or resolution or part thereof and
returns it to the council with his objections, the council shall, not later
than the next regular meeting, proceed to reconsider it, and, if upon such
consideration, the resolution or ordinance or part or item thereof disapproved
by the mayor is approved by the vote of two-thirds of all the members elected
to the council it shall then take effect as if it had received the signature of
the mayor. In all such cases the votes shall be taken by “yeas” and “nays” and
entered upon the journal.
   Section 13.   The fiscal year of the city shall begin the first day of
January. A temporary appropriation ordinance to control expenditures prepared
by the mayor, the director of law and the director of finance and public record
shall be passed on or before the thirty-first day of December each year. An
annual appropriation ordinance must be passed by April 1 of each year for the
period January 1 to December 31. The mayor, the director of law, and the
director of finance and public record shall present to the council their annual
estimate of the expense for conducting the affairs of the city no later than
March 10th of each year.  The council shall prepare an appropriation ordinance
and pass the same by April 1. The estimates in the appropriation ordinance
shall be compiled from detailed information obtained from the various
departments on uniform blanks prepared by the director of finance and public
record, and shall set forth:
   (a)   an itemized estimate of the expenditures of each department;
   (b)   comparisons of such estimates with the corresponding items of
expenditure for the last two complete fiscal years and with the expenditures of
the current fiscal year plus an estimate of expenditures necessary to complete
the current fiscal year;
   (c)   reasons for proposed increases or decreases in such items of
expenditure compared with the current fiscal year;
   (d)   a separate schedule for each department showing the things necessary
for the department to do during the year and which of any desirable things it
ought to do if possible;
   (e)   items of pay roll increases as either additional pay to present
employees, or pay for more employees;
   (f)   the amounts required for interest on the city’s debt, and for sinking
funds as required by law;
   (g)   the total amount of the outstanding city debt with a schedule of
maturities of bond issues;
   (h)   such other information as may be required by the council.
(Amended 11-8-11.)
   Section 14.   Upon the receipt of the estimate the council shall at once
prepare an appropriation ordinance, in such manner as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution, using the estimate as a basis. Provision shall be made
for public hearings upon the appropriation ordinance before a committee of the
council or before the entire council sitting as a committee of the whole.
   Section 15.   An accruing revenue of the city, not appropriated as
hereinbefore provided, and any balance at any time remaining after the purposes
of the appropriation shall have been satisfied or abandoned may from time to
time be appropriated or transferred by ordinance by the council to such uses or
other fund or funds as will not conflict with any uses for which specifically
such revenues accrued.
   Section 16.   No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor
shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant
to appropriations made by the council. At the end of each year all unexpended
balances of appropriation if any shall revert to the respective funds from
which the same were appropriated and shall then be subject to future
appropriations; but appropriations may be made in furtherance of improvements
or other objects or work of the city which will not be completed within the
current year.
   Money appropriated as hereinbefore provided shall not be used for purposes
other than those designated in the appropriation ordinance; provided however
that the Council may from time to time appropriate or transfer such moneys so
appropriated by the appropriation ordinance, by ordinance to such uses, or
other fund or funds as will not conflict with any uses for which specifically
such revenues accrued.
   Section 17.   Every ordinance or resolution of a general and permanent
nature upon its final passage shall be recorded in a book kept for that
purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer
and clerk of the council. Every ordinance or resolution of a general or
permanent nature shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city or published in an official municipal bulletin within ten days
after its final passage.
   Section 18.   The council shall fix by ordinance the amount of bond to be
given by each officer, clerk and employee in each department of the city
government, if any be required, which bond shall be a surety bond given by such
officer, clerk or employee, with surety to the approval of the mayor and
council, and said council is to pay the premium on the same.
   Section 19.   The council shall create by ordinance such other officers,
clerks and employees as are not in the classified service, in each department
of the city government as are necessary for the transaction of the city’s
business, and all such positions so created shall be filled by appointment by
the mayor; and further, the council shall fix the compensation of each officer,
clerk and employee so created, and such compensation shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which the said officers, clerks or employees
were chosen nor at any other time except in an odd numbered year.
   Section 20.   The council shall provide by ordinance for the deposit by the
director of finance and public record of all moneys coming into his hands as
city treasurer in such bank or banks situated within the City of Shelby as
offer at competitive bidding the highest rate of interest upon daily balances,
such bank to be designated as depository of city funds, and any moneys due the
City of Shelby from the County Treasurer shall be paid direct to the city
depository. To secure such deposits such bank or banks shall be required to
give good and sufficient bond or bonds, subject to the approval of the mayor,
director of law and director of finance and public record. The total moneys on
deposit in any bank shall not exceed its paid-up capital stock and surplus.
   Section 21.   The council may, by a two-thirds vote of the members elected
thereto, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein.
An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety, or providing for
the usual daily operation of a municipal department, in which the emergency is
set forth and defined in a preamble thereto. Ordinances appropriating money may
be passed as emergency measures, but no measure making a grant, renewal or
extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or regulating the rate to
be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be so passed.
   Section 22.   Any power or function now or hereafter committed to the City
of Shelby, which is not in this charter specifically provided for shall be
vested in the council and it shall be the duty of the council by appropriate
legislation to make provision for the exercise thereof.
Administrative Powers of the City.
   Section 23.   The executive and administrative powers of the city shall be
vested in the mayor, director of law, director of finance and public record,
and such other executive and administrative officers as are provided for in
this charter or may be fixed by ordinance of council.
The Mayor.
   Section 24.   The executive and administrative powers of the City of Shelby,
except as herein otherwise provided for, shall be vested in a mayor, who shall
be a resident elector of the city. The mayor shall be elected for a term of
four years commencing with the 1998 term, assume office on the first day of
January, 12 o’clock noon, following his election, and serve until his successor
is elected and qualified.
   He shall not hold any other public office or public employment, except that
of notary public or member of the State militia, and shall not be interested in
the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the
municipality.
(Amended 11-5-1996)
   Section 25.   The salary of the mayor shall be fixed by the council and it
shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he was chosen
nor at any other time except in an odd-numbered year. The salary of the mayor
first elected under this charter shall be fixed by the outgoing council, and
shall not be more than $1200.00 and not less than $1000.00 per annum.
   Section 26.   If the mayor dies, resigns or removes his residence from the
city during the term of his office he shall be succeeded in office until the
first day of January following the next regular municipal election, by one of
the officers provided for in this charter. The order of succession in such
cases shall be as follows: director of law; director of finance and public
record; councilmember at large; and members of council from the wards in order
based upon their total service upon council. At the next regular municipal
election following the death, resignation or removal of the mayor from the
city, a mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. If the mayor be
temporarily absent from the city, or become temporarily disabled from any
cause, his duties shall be performed during such absence or disability by the
head of one of the aforesaid departments in the above order under the title of
acting mayor. 
(Amended 11-5-2002; 5-3-2011)
   Section 27.   The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and
the chief conservator of the peace therein, and, besides his powers and duties
as president of the council, and his powers and duties as director of public
safety, and director of public service as hereinafter prescribed, it shall be
his duty to see that the laws of the State of Ohio and the ordinances of the
city are faithfully obeyed and enforced within the city, and to appoint all
officers and employees of the city whose election or appointment is not
otherwise expressly provided for by law, by this charter, or by ordinance, and
he shall have such other powers and duties, not in conflict with the provisions
of this charter, as are provided by law for mayors of cities.
   “And all appointments made by the mayor to be confirmed by Council; and the
Chief of Police shall be responsible for his acts of misconduct to the mayor,
and the patrolmen shall be responsible for their acts of misconduct to the
Chief of Police.”
   Section 28.   The mayor shall be ex-officio the director of public safety
and the director of public service and as such shall exercise all powers and
perform all duties as have heretofore been delegated to and conferred upon the
director of public safety and the director of public service by the laws of the
State of Ohio.
   Section 29.   It shall be the duty of the mayor to recommend to the council
for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; to keep the
council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city; to
prepare and submit to the council such reports as may be required by that body,
and to exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred or
required by this charter or by the laws of the State.
   Section 30.   Should the director of law or the director of finance and
public record die, resign, or be disqualified for any cause from performing the
duties of their respective offices during the term for which they were elected,
the mayor shall fill said vacancy so created by appointment for the unexpired
terms, subject to the confirmation of the Council.
Director of Law.
   Section 31.   The director of law shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to
practice in the State of Ohio. He shall be elected for a term of four years (a
two-year term commencing in 1998, and a four-year term commencing with the year
2000), assume office on the first day of January, at 12 o’clock noon, following
his election, and serve until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall
be the legal adviser of and attorney and counsel for the city, and for all
officers and departments thereof in matters relating to their official duties.
He shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which
the city is concerned and shall endorse on each his approval of the form and
correctness thereof. 
(Amended 11-5-1996)
   Section 32.   The director of law shall be the prosecuting attorney of the
police court.* He may designate such manner of assistant prosecutors as the
council by ordinance may authorize. He shall prosecute all cases brought before
such court and perform the same duties so far as they are applicable thereto,
as are required of the prosecuting attorney of the county.
   *No longer in existence-Ed. 
   Section 33.   When required to do so by resolution of the council, the
director of law shall prosecute or defend for and in behalf of the city, all
complaints, suits and controversies in which the city is a party, and such
other suits, matters and controversies as he shall by resolution or ordinance,
be directed to prosecute or defend.
   Section 34.   In addition to the duties imposed upon the director of law by
this charter or required of him by ordinance in accordance therewith, he shall
perform the duties which are imposed upon city solicitors by the general laws
of the State, beyond the competence of this charter to alter or require.
   Section 35.   The salary of the director of law shall be fixed by the
council and it shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which
he was chosen, nor at any other time except in an odd-numbered year. The salary
of the director of law first elected under this charter shall be fixed by the
outgoing council, and be not more than $1200.00 nor less than $1000.00 per
year.
Director of Finance and Public Record.
   Section 36.   The director of finance and public record shall be an elector
of the City of Shelby and shall be elected for a term of four years (a two-year
term commencing in 1998, and a four-year term commencing with the year 2000),
assume office on the first day of January at 12 o’clock noon following his
election and serve until his successor is elected and qualified. His salary
shall be fixed by the council, and it shall not be increased or diminished
during the term for which he was chosen, nor at any other time except in an
odd-numbered year.  (Amended 11-5-1996)
   Section 37.   The duties of the director of finance and public record shall
include the keeping and supervision of all accounts, and the custody and
collection of all public moneys, rents and property belonging to or due the
city; the making and collecting of special assessments; the issuance of
licenses upon the order of the mayor; the collection of license fees; the
control, funding and payment of the public debt of the city; and such other
duties as the council may require.
   Section 38.   The director of finance and public record shall perform the
duties of clerk of council and in addition to his other duties, shall perform
all clerical duties incident to the mayor acting as ex-officio director of
public safety and director of public service as is hereinbefore provided, and
all other clerical duties incident to the operation of the city government and
for which duties he shall receive no additional compensation.
Accounting Procedure.
   Section 39.   Accounting procedures shall be devised and maintained for the
city adequate to record in detail all transactions affecting the acquisition,
custodianship and disposition of values, including cash receipts and
disbursements; and the recorded facts shall be presented periodically to
officials and to the public in such summaries and analytical schedules in
detailed support thereof, as shall be necessary to show the full effect of such
transactions for each fiscal year upon the finances of the city and in relation
to each department of the city government, including distinct summaries and
schedules for each public utility or building owned or operated.
Accounts.
   Section 40.   The director of finance and public record shall be the chief
accounting officer of the city. He shall install and maintain accounting
procedures in conformity with the next preceding section of this charter, and
prescribe the methods of keeping accounts by all departments and the form of
report to be rendered to the department of finance and public record. He shall
require that reports be made to him by each department, showing the receipts of
all moneys by such department and the disposition thereof. He shall keep an
account of all appropriations made by the council and all expenditures made or
contracted to be made under such appropriations. 
   Section 41.   The director of finance and public record shall, upon the
death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of any officer, examine
the accounts of such officer and if such officer be found indebted to the city,
he shall immediately give notice thereof to the council and the director of
law, and the latter shall forthwith proceed to collect the same.
Payment of Claims.
   Section 42.   No warrant for the payment of any claim shall be issued by the
director of finance and public record until such claim shall have been approved
by the mayor, and the mayor and his sureties shall be liable to the city for
all loss or damage sustained by the city by reason of the negligent or corrupt
approval of any claim against the city by him. Whenever any claim shall be
presented to the director of finance and public record he shall have power to
require evidence that the amount claimed is justly due and that such claim is
in conformity to law and ordinance. For that purpose the director of finance
and public record may summon before him any officer, agent, or employee of any
department, or any other person, and examine him upon oath or affirmation
relative thereto, which oath or affirmation he may administer. 
   If the director of finance and public record shall draw a warrant for any
claim contrary to law or ordinance he and his sureties shall be individually
liable for the amount thereof.
Treasurer.
   Section 43.   The director of finance and public record shall be ex-officio
the city treasurer and as such treasurer shall receive no additional
compensation therefor. He shall keep and preserve all moneys of the city in the
place or places determined by the council as provided herein. Such place or
places of keeping shall be known as the city depository. All moneys of the city
shall be disbursed by the treasurer by warrant issued to the city depository
and countersigned by the mayor. He shall also receive and disburse all other
public money coming into his hands as city treasurer, in pursuance of such
regulations as may be prescribed by the authorities having lawful control over
such funds.
   Section 44.   The bank or banks in which the moneys of the city are
deposited shall, on the first day of each month, render to the council and file
with the mayor, a statement showing the daily balances to the credit of the
city during the preceding month, together with such other information as the
council may require.
   The director of finance and public record shall also, on the first day of
the month, render to and file with the council and the mayor a monthly
statement of all receipts and expenditures of all departments for the preceding
month in the form prescribed by the council.
   Such report may be required by the council at any time, without notice, and
shall be examined and compared by, or under the direction of council, and shall
remain on file for at least one year.
   Section 45.   The director of finance and public record shall have charge of
the preparation and certification of all special assessments for public
improvements; the serving of notices of such assessments to property owners,
and all other duties connected therewith; the collection of such assessments as
are payable directly to the city and the preparation and certification of all
unpaid assessments to the county auditor for collection.
Contracts Certified.
   Section 46.   No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the
expenditure of money, shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance,
resolution, or order for the expenditure of money be passed by the council or
by any officer of the city, unless the director of finance and public record
shall first certify to the council or to the proper officer, as the case may
be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation, or
expenditure, is in the treasury, to the credit of the fund from which it is to
be drawn, and not appropriated for any other purpose, which certificate shall
be filed and recorded in the records of the council. The sum so certified shall
not thereafter be considered unappropriated until the city is discharged from
the contract, agreement or obligation.
   All moneys actually in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which
they are to be drawn, and all moneys applicable to the payment of the
obligation or appropriation involved, that are anticipated to come into the
treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement or obligation, from
taxes or assessments, or from sales or services, products or by-products, or
from any city undertakings, fees, charges, accounts and bills receivable or
other credits in process of collection; and all moneys applicable to the
payment of such obligation or appropriation, which are to be paid into the
treasury prior to the maturity thereof, arising from the sale or lease of lands
or other property, and moneys to be derived from lawfully authorized bonds, or
notes sold and in process of delivery, shall, for the purpose of such
certificate, be deemed in the treasury to the credit of the appropriate fund
and subject to such certification. No contract shall be let which exceeds the
estimate for the improvement contemplated.
Contracts, When Void.
   Section 47.   All contracts, agreements, or other obligations, and all
ordinances, resolutions and orders entered into or passed contrary to the
provisions of the preceding sections, shall be void, and no person whatever
shall have any claim or demand against the city thereunder, nor shall the
council or any officer of the city waive or qualify the limits fixed by such
ordinance, resolution or order, or fasten upon the city any liability whatever
in excess of such limits, or release any party from an exact compliance with
his contract under such ordinance, resolution or order.
Establishment of a Police Court and the Appointment of a Police Judge.
   Section 48.   (Section 48 of the city charter was repealed by the voters on
November 7, 2000.)
   Section 49.   (Section 49 of the city charter was repealed by the voters on
November 7, 2000.)
Public Welfare and Health.
   Section 50.   The mayor as director of public safety shall appoint a
director of public welfare who shall be the health officer of the city and
shall, under the direction and control of the mayor enforce all ordinances and
laws relating to the health of the public, and shall perform all duties and
have all powers relative to the public health exercised in municipalities by
health officers. He shall have charge of and manage all charitable,
correctional and recreational agencies belonging to the municipality. He shall
have charge of the inspection and supervision of all public amusements and
entertainments. He shall have charge of the sanitary inspection and supervision
of the production, transportation, storage and sale of foods and foodstuffs. He
shall have charge of the preservation and promotion of the public health, the
prevention and restriction of disease, the prevention, abatement and
suppression of nuisances, the enforcement of isolation and quarantine
regulations. He shall enforce and prosecute all laws, ordinances and
regulations, relative to the public welfare for the violation of which
penalties are imposed now in force or which may hereafter be established or
enacted by council or general law. The mayor shall make all needful rules and
regulations for the government of this department of public safety as
prescribed by ordinance or the general laws of the State, and in cases of
epidemic or other emergency, such additional rules as may be necessary for the
public health.
Sinking Fund.
   Section 51.   The mayor, the director of law, and the director of finance
and public record shall constitute the sinking fund trustees, but as such
trustees, they shall receive no additional compensation. The mayor shall be the
president, and the director of finance and public record shall be the secretary
of the trustees of the sinking fund. The trustees of the sinking fund shall
manage and control the sinking fund in the manner provided by laws of the State
of Ohio or by ordinance.
Civil Service Commission.
   Section 52.   (a)   There shall be a civil service commission, with the
powers and duties conferred or imposed by the law upon municipal civil service
commissions, and the mayor with the advice and consent of the council shall
form a civil service commission. Members of the civil service commission in
office at the time of the adoption of this section shall continue in office
until the expiration of their terms.
   (b)   In the case of appointment of any person to the entry-level position
of police officer, the director of public safety may appoint persons who have
obtained and maintained basic Ohio peace officer certification (or equivalent)
and who are employed by another jurisdiction as a police officer, deputy
sheriff, or State highway patrol officer to such position without first
administering a competitive examination. In the case of appointment of any
person to the entry-level position of firefighter, the director of public
safety may appoint persons who have obtained and maintained Ohio professional
firefighter certification and Ohio paramedic certification (or equivalent) and
who are employed by another jurisdiction as a firefighter to such position
without first administering a competitive examination. In lieu of a competitive
examination, the director of public safety may assess the merit and fitness of
any such applicant so qualified by review of his or her record while employed
as a law enforcement officer or firefighter. The selection procedures and
selection criteria applicable to such persons appointed without taking a
competitive examination shall be as set forth by a rule duly adopted by the
civil service commission.
(Amended 11-3-2015)
NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS
Nomination by Primary Election.
   Section 53.   Any elector of this municipality save and except as is
hereinbefore provided may become a candidate for any elective office herein
provided for and have his name printed upon the primary ballot, which ballot
shall be printed without party designation, by filing with the board of
elections a petition signed by at least two (2) per centum of the total vote
cast for mayor at the last municipal general election, provided that a petition
for a candidate for councilmember from a ward shall be signed by two (2) per
centum of the total vote cast for mayor within that ward in which the candidate
seeks to run. Those candidates equal to twice the number of places to be filled
in each office, who respectively received the highest number of votes for each
office at the primary election, shall have their names printed upon the ballots
for the general  election, provided that in case of a tie vote at such primary
election, all persons receiving such equal number of votes shall have their
names printed upon the ballots for the general election, and provided further
that in case fewer than twice the number of places to be filled in each office
are voted for at such primary election, then all such names voted for shall be
placed upon the ballots for the general election. All nominating  petitions
shall be signed, filed and verified and each candidate’s declaration to qualify
if nominated and elected shall be filed and verified in the manner prescribed
by State law at least seventy-five days prior to the date of holding such
primary election. The names of all candidates upon such primary ballots shall
be placed under their proper and respective designation indicating the office
to be filled and the number to be voted for and in proper rotation as provided
for by State law, and such primary election shall be held in the manner
prescribed by State law except as herein provided.
(Amended 1-1-1944; 11-8-1994)
   Section 53A.   In the event there are no more than two candidates for each
elective office, the city council may, at its option, declare the primary
election unnecessary and said primary election shall not be held.
(Adopted 1-1-1944)
Nomination by Petition.
   Section 54.   Any elector of this municipality save and except as is
hereinbefore provided, may become a candidate for any elective office provided
for by this charter by filing with the board of deputy state supervisors a
nomination petition signed by not less than one (1) per centum of the total
number of votes cast for mayor at the last regular municipal election for the
first election thereunder and twenty-five (25) per centum for all succeeding
years. Such nomination by petition shall in all particulars conform to the
requirements prescribed by general law.
Regular Elections.
   Section 55.   All officers provided to be elected in this charter shall be
elected upon one ballot without party designation. The names of all candidates
nominated by primary election or by petition as herein provided shall be placed
upon the general election ballot under the proper heading designating the
office to be filled and the number of persons to be voted for and the names of
candidates shall be printed in rotation as required by State law.  The ballots
shall in all other respects conform as nearly as may be to the form prescribed
by the election laws of the State, and the general election shall be held and
its results determined as prescribed by State law. 
(Amended 11-8-1994)
Special Elections.
   Section 56.   All other elections held under this charter, except those
designated as regular municipal and primary elections, shall be known as
special municipal elections and, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be
conducted and the results canvassed and announced by the election authorities
as prescribed by the general election laws of the State.
The Recall.
   Section 57.   Any elective officer or officers provided for in this charter
may be removed by the qualified electors of this municipality and his or their
successor or successors elected in the following manner:
   Section 58.   A petition demanding the removal of such officer or officers
shall be filed with the clerk of the council signed by at least thirty-five
(35) per centum of the qualified voters of the municipality, based upon the
number of votes cast for mayor at the last municipal election, and containing a
general statement of not more than two hundred words of the ground upon which
the removal is sought.
   Section 59.   Such petition shall be secured from the clerk of council by
one or more qualified electors who shall file an affidavit stating the name and
office of the officer or officers sought to be removed. Upon issuing such
petition papers to an elector or electors, the clerk shall make record of same
and to whom issued, and shall certify on such petitions the name of the elector
or electors to whom issued and the date.
   Section 60.   The signatures to such petitions need not be appended to any
one paper, but all such signatures shall be made in ink or indelible pencil,
and to each petition paper shall be attached the affidavit of the circulator
thereof, stating the number of signers to such part of the petition and that
each signature appended to the paper was made in his presence and is the
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
   Section 61.   All petition papers comprising a recall petition shall be
assembled and filed with the clerk within thirty days from the issuance of the
petitions to the electors filing the demand of removal. The clerk shall
forthwith present the complete petition for recall to the council and if the
form, regularity, and sufficiency of the petition shall be found sufficient the
person or persons whose removal is sought shall be notified by the clerk within
five days. If the person, or persons, whose removal is sought does not resign
within five days after receiving official notice of the sufficiency of the
recall petition, the council shall thereupon order and fix by resolution a day
for a recall election and such election shall be held not less than forty nor
more than sixty days after the filing of the complete petition with the
council.
   Section 62.   The ballot at such recall election shall conform to the
following requirements:
   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be
submitted, “Shall (name of person) be removed from office (name of office) by
recall?”
   Immediately following each such question shall be printed or appended to any
one paper, but all such signatures shall be made the ballot in the order set
forth in the following propositions:
   For the recall of (name of person).
   Against the recall of (name of person).
   Before each such question shall be printed a square in which the electors by
placing a cross mark (X) may vote for either of such propositions.
   The name of the officer whose removal is sought shall not appear on the
ballot as a candidate to succeed himself.
   Section 63.   Immediately under such questions and propositions shall be
placed the names of candidates to fill the vacancy or vacancies. Candidates for
such vacancy shall be nominated by petition by filing with the proper election
authorities at least twenty days prior to such recall election, a petition
containing not less than ten (10) per centrum of the total vote cast for mayor
at the last election. Such nominating petition shall in all other particulars
conform to the general statutes of the State governing nominations by petition.
   Section 64.   If the majority of the votes cast at such recall election
shall be in the affirmative such officers shall be deemed removed and the
office vacant immediately upon the announcement of the official canvass of the
election. The candidate receiving the plurality of all votes cast for persons
to fill such vacancy shall be declared elected and shall at once succeed to the
office and shall continue in office for the unexpired term of the person
removed.
   Section 65.   No petition for the removal of an officer shall be filed
earlier than six months after the date of his entrance upon the duties of the
office.
   Section 66.   Except as herein provided for the general election laws of the
State shall determine the manner of holding the recall election and the board
of deputy supervisors shall conduct the same according to law.
The Initiative.
   Section 67.   Any proposed ordinance for legislative enactment or any
proposed ordinance or ordinances for repealing any existing ordinance or
ordinances in whole or in part may be submitted to the council by petition
signed by not less than ten (10) per centrum of the qualified electors of the
city based upon the number of votes cast for mayor at the last preceding
municipal election.
   Section 68.   The form of such proposed ordinance shall be in proper legal
language approved by the director of law, or upon request of the persons
desiring to propose such ordinance shall be drawn by him in due form and the
director of law shall render such other service as may be requested by
petitioners.
   Section 69.   The petition presenting the proposed ordinance shall contain
such ordinance in full together with a statement containing not more than two
hundred words giving the petitioner’s reason why such ordinance should be
adopted. Such petition shall be filed with the director of law who shall at
once note the date of filing the same with him thereon and who shall determine
the form, sufficiency and legality of the same. If not found in proper form he
shall return the same to petitioners for correction. If of proper form he shall
certify the same to the city council. The director of law shall pass upon the
petition and return the same to petitioner for correction or certify same to
the council within five days of the filing of the same with him.
   Section 70.   The council shall either pass such proposed ordinance without
alteration within thirty days after the sufficiency of the petition has been
determined and certified to it; or, within thirty days after such certification
the council shall call a special election, unless a general or regular primary
election shall be held within six months hereafter, and at such special,
primary, or general election such proposed ordinance shall be submitted without
alteration to a vote of the electors of the city.
   If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the proposed ordinance
shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become a valid and binding
ordinance of the city. If the provisions of two or more ordinances adopted at
the same election conflict the ordinance receiving the largest affirmative vote
shall prevail. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same
election and all such elections shall be held and the result determined in
accordance with general law, provided that there shall not be more than one
special election for such purpose in any period of one year.
   Section 71.   The form of the initiative petition, the circulating thereof
and securing of signatures to the same, and the form of the ballot to be used
in submitting a proposed ordinance to the electors of the city shall be in
accordance with and determined by the general laws governing the initiative in
State measures.
The Referendum.
   Section 72.   No franchise, ordinance, resolution or measure passed by the
city council, except however, that, whenever the council is by law required to
pass more than one ordinance, resolution or other measure to complete the
legislation necessary to make and pay for any public improvement, the
provisions of this article shall apply only to the first ordinance, resolution
and other measure relative thereto; ordinances or other measures providing for
appropriations for the current expenses of the city, or for street improvements
petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the feet front of the property
benefited and to be especially assessed for the cost thereof as provided by
this charter; ordinances or resolutions passed for the purpose of borrowing
money by refunding bond, note, or certificates of indebtedness; and ordinances
such as are provided in Section
73 shall go into effect until thirty days after its passage. If within said
thirty days a petition, signed by not less than ten (10) per cent of the
qualified electors of the city based upon the number of votes cast for mayor at
the last municipal election, requesting the repeal or submission to a
referendum of said ordinance be presented to the council, the same shall
thereupon be suspended from going into operation, and it shall be the duty of
the council to reconsider such ordinance. If upon such reconsideration said
ordinance is not repealed the council may, after the form, sufficiency and
legality of the petition shall have been determined and certified by the
director of law, submit the ordinance to a vote of the electors of the city at
a regular or special election which may be called at the discretion of the
council. If upon reconsideration by the council such ordinance is lost, or if
the council fails to submit such ordinance to a referendum after the
presentation of such petition requesting a referendum the same shall be null
and void. If approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at a
referendum election such ordinance shall immediately go into effect. 
   Section 73.   Ordinances passed as emergency measures or measures necessary
for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety shall be
subject to referendum in like manner as other ordinances except that they shall
go into effect at the time indicated in such ordinances. If, when submitted to
a vote of the electors, an emergency measure is not approved by a majority
voting thereon, it shall be considered repealed as regards any further action
thereunder; but such measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority
for payment in accordance with the ordinance, of any expense incurred previous
to the referendum vote thereon.
   Section 74.   If by proper petition a referendum vote be required upon any
ordinance providing for the expenditure of money, a bond issue, or a public
improvement, all steps preliminary to such actual expenditure, actual issuance
of bonds, or actual execution of contract for such improvement, may be taken
prior to such referendum election.
   Section 75.   The form of referendum petitions, the circulating thereof and
securing of signatures thereto, and the form of the ballot to be used in such
referendum election shall be in accordance with and determined by the general
laws governing the referendum on act of the General Assembly of the State.
IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
Local Improvements.
   Section 76.   The council shall have power by ordinance or resolution to
provide for the construction, reconstruction, oiling, repair and maintenance by
contract or directly by the employment of labor, of all things in the nature of
local improvements, and to provide for the payment of any part of the cost of
any such improvement by levying and collecting special assessments upon
abutting, adjacent and contiguous or other specially benefited property. The
amount assessed against the property specially benefited to pay for such local
improvements shall not exceed the amount of benefits accruing to such property.
Any cost for such improvement in excess of any sum assessed therefor shall be
paid by the city.
Methods of Special Assessment.
   Section 77.   Special assessments upon property deemed benefited by a public
improvement shall be by any one of the following methods:
   (a)   By a percentage of the tax value of the property assessed;
   (b)   in proportion to the benefits which may result from the improvement;
   (c)   by the foot frontage of the property bounding or abutting upon the
improvement.
Preliminary Assessments.
   Section 78.   When it is deemed necessary to make a public improvement to be
paid for in whole or in part by special assessment, the council shall declare
the necessity therefor by resolution, and such resolution shall include the
method of assessment, the mode of payment, and the number of semi-annual
installments. Such resolution shall thereupon be certified to the director of
finance and public record, who shall thereupon proceed to make an assessment
report, in accordance with the method of assessment provided in the resolution,
which report shall be filed with the council, and shall show the lots and lands
assessed, and the amount of the assessment as to each, and the number of semi-
annual installments not exceeding twenty (20), in which such assessment shall
be paid. 
(Amended 5-2-2006)
Notices Served.
   Section 79.   Upon the filing of such report the director of finance and
public record shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner or owners
or the agent or agents of the owner or owners of each lot or parcel of land to
be assessed, or upon the persons in whose names the same they may be assessed
for taxation upon the tax duplicate, said notice to be served as is provided
for service of summons in civil action; and as to all non-residents and persons
who cannot be found, publication of such notice shall be made at least once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said notice shall contain a
statement of the character of the proposed improvement, the fact that the
assessment report has been filed with the council, the rate of such
assessments, the number of installments, and shall set a time and place when
complaints and claims will be heard before the board of revision of
assessments.
Plans of Proposed Improvements.
   Section 80.   At the time of the passage of said resolution of necessity
hereinbefore provided there shall be on file in the office of the mayor, plans,
specifications, estimates and profiles of the proposed improvement, giving all
information necessary; and such plans, specifications, estimates and profiles
shall be open to the inspection of all interested persons.
Board of Revision of Assessments.
   Section 81.   The board of revision of assessments shall consist of the
mayor, the director of law and the director of finance and public record. The
mayor shall be president of the board and the director of finance and public
record shall be the secretary thereof. It shall meet at such times and places
as is provided by its rules and shall hear all claims and objections as to the
character of all improvements to be paid for in part or in whole by special
assessments, the necessity therefor, and the equity of the assessments as
provided in the assessment report. A majority of those constituting the board
of revision of assessments shall have power to determine all complaints and
objections submitted to it, and as to each improvement the board shall after
such hearing amend, equalize, and adjust the assessment report, and shall
report its findings as to the necessity for the improvements and any amendments
it directs in the assessments to the council.
Claims.
   Section 82.   An owner of a lot or land bounding and abutting upon a
proposed improvement claiming that he will sustain damage by reason of the
improvement shall present such claim to the board of revision of assessments
within two weeks after the service of notice of the completion of the
publication hereinbefore provided. Such claim shall be in writing and shall set
forth the amount of damages claimed, with a general description of the property
with respect to which it is claimed the damage will accrue. Any owner who fails
so to do shall be deemed to have waived such damages and shall be barred from
filing a claim or receiving damages therefor. This provision shall apply to all
damages which will obviously result from the improvement, but shall not deprive
the owner of his right to recover damages arising without his fault, from acts
of the city or its agents. The board of revision of assessments shall report to
the council all such claims for damages filed with it.
Final Assessment.
   Section 83.   Whenever the board of revision of assessments shall have made
its final report to the council as to any improvement, the council, if it
determines that the improvement shall proceed shall pass an ordinance levying
the assessment as reported by the board of revision of assessments and
directing that the improvement proceed.
   In such ordinance it shall be sufficient to describe the lots and lands
abutting upon the improvement and to be assessed therefor, as all the lots and
lands bounding and abutting upon such improvement between and including the
termini of the improvement; and in describing lands which do not abut it shall
be sufficient to describe the lots by their appropriate lot numbers, and the
lands by metes and bounds; and this rule of description shall apply in all
proceedings in which lots and lands are to be charged with special assessments.
   Special assessments shall be payable by the owners of the property assessed
at the time stipulated in the ordinance, and shall be a lien from the date of
the assessment upon the respective lots and parcels of land assessed
enforceable in the manner provided by general law.
Damages Assessed.
   Section 84.   At the time of the passage of the ordinance determining to
proceed with the improvement as hereinbefore provided, the council shall
determine whether the claims for damages so filed shall be judicially inquired
into before commencing or after the completion of the proposed improvement. If
it decides that the damages shall be assessed before commencing the
improvement, the director of law shall then make a written application to a
court of competent jurisdiction for inquiry into, and assessment of such
damages, which inquiry and assessment shall be confined to such claims.
   When the council determines to assess the damages after the completion of
the improvement for which a claim for damages has been filed as hereinbefore
provided, the director of law shall within ten (10) days after the completion
of the improvement, make written application as hereinbefore provided in the
case of the ascertainment of damages before the improvement was made, and the
same proceedings shall be had.
   No person who claims damages arising from any cause shall commence a suit
therefor against the city until he shall have filed a claim for such damages
with the director of finance and public record and sixty (60) days shall have
elapsed thereafter to enable the  city to take such steps as it may deem proper
to settle or adjust the claim; but this provision shall not apply to an
application for an injunction or other proceeding to which it may be necessary
for such applicant to resort in case of urgent necessity.
Work to Be Done.
   Section 85.   When the council shall have passed an ordinance directing an
improvement to be made, to be paid for in whole, or in part by special
assessments the mayor shall, as provided by ordinance, either directly by the
employment of labor or by entering into a contract therefor, cause the
improvement to be made.
Lands Unallotted or Not on Duplicate.
   Section 86.   When special assessments are levied by the percentage of tax
value of the property assessed or by the foot frontage of the property bounding
and abutting upon the improvement, and there are lands subject to such
assessment which are not assessed for taxation, the director of finance and
public record shall fix, for the purpose of such assessment, the value of such
lots as they stand and of such lands at such depths as the director of finance
and public record considers a fair average of the assessed value of other lots
in the neighborhood, and where lands are not subdivided into lots but are
assessed for taxation, the director of finance and public record shall fix the
value and the depth in the same manner; but the above rule shall not apply in
making a special assessment according to benefits.
Interest on Assessment Bonds.
   Section 87.   When bonds or notes are issued in anticipation of the
collection of assessments, the interest thereon shall be treated as part of the
cost of the improvement for which the assessments may be made.
Limitation on Assessments.
   Section 88.   The council shall limit all assessments to the special
benefits conferred upon the property assessed, and in no case shall there be
levied on any lot or parcel of land any assessments for any or all purposes
within a period of five years in excess of thirty-three and one-third per cent
(33 1/3) of the actual value thereof after the improvement is made unless the
owner or owners of such property shall, in writing waive the said limitation.
Assessments levied for the construction of main sewers shall not exceed the sum
that, in the opinion of council, would be required to construct an ordinary
street sewer or drain of sufficient capacity to drain or sewer the lots or
lands to be assessed for such improvement, nor shall any lots or lands be
assessed that do not need local drainage, or which are provided therewith.
City's Portion of Cost.
   Section 89.   The city shall pay such part of the cost and expense of
improvements for which special assessments are levied as the council deems
just, which part shall not be less than one fiftieth (1/50) of all such cost
and expense; and in addition thereto the city shall pay the cost of
intersections; and the council may provide for the payment of the city’s
portion of all such improvements by the issuance of bonds or notes therefor,
and may levy taxes, in addition to all other taxes authorized by law, to pay
such bonds or notes and the interest thereon. The council may provide for the
transferring to the general fund of such portion of the proceeds of special
assessments or of the proceeds of bonds issued in anticipation of the
collection of special assessments, and of the proceeds of bonds or notes issued
or taxes levied to provide funds for the payment of the city’s share of the
cost of improvements, as is equal to the estimated cost of the engineering and
inspection done or to be done directly by the city in connection with said
improvement.
   The council may join the city’s portion of the bonds issued to pay the
city’s cost of any such improvements, such as paving sidewalks or sewer
improvements, with the bonds necessary to be sold to pay the special
assessments made for said improvement, and so joined may be sold as one series
in the same issue, and under the same advertisement.
Replacing Existing Improvements.
   Section 90.   The council may provide in whole or in part the cost of
replacing any improvement existing in the street at the time of the adoption of
this charter, by levying special assessments as hereinbefore provided, and to
be governed by State law.
Subsequent Improvements.
   Section 91.   Every ordinance providing for an improvement to be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessments passed subsequent to the adoption of
this charter shall be governed by State law.
Supplementary Assessments and Rebates.
   Section 92.   Upon the completion of any improvement the director of finance
and public record shall, in the event of there being a deficit in the fund
provided for the making of any such improvement, report to the council a
supplementary assessment to be made by ordinance of the council and certified
for collection as is provided in the case of original assignments, but no such
supplementary assessment shall be levied after the expiration of one year from
the date of the completion of the improvement.
Sewer and Water Connections.
   Section 93.   The council shall have authority to compel the making of sewer
and water connections whenever, in view of the contemplated street improvements
or as a sanitary regulation, sewer or water connections should, in their
judgment, be constructed. They shall cause written notice to their
determination thereof to be given to the owner or agent of such owner of each
lot or parcel of land to which such connections are to be made, which notice to
the owner or agent of such owner of each lot or parcel of land to which such
connections are to be made, shall state the number and character of connections
required. Such notice shall be served by the director of finance and public
record in the manner provided for the service of summons in civil actions. Non-
residents of the city or persons who cannot be found, may be served by one
publication of such notice in a newspaper of general circulation, in the city,
which notice shall state the time within which such connections shall be
constructed; and if they be not constructed within the said time, the work may
be done by the city and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of five (5%)
per cent assessed against the lots and lands for which such connections are
made. Said assessments shall be certified and collected as other assessments
for street improvements.
Sidewalks.
   Section 94.   The council may by resolution declare that certain specified
sidewalks, curbing, or gutters shall be constructed or repaired. Upon the
passage of such a resolution the clerk of the council shall cause written
notice of the passage thereof to be served upon the owner, or agent of the
owner, of each parcel of land abutting upon such sidewalk, who may be a
resident of the city, in the manner provided by law for the service of summons
in civil actions. He shall return a copy of the notice with the time and manner
of service endorsed thereon, signed by the person serving it, to the mayor who
shall file and preserve such return. For the purpose of such service, if the
owner of any such property be not a resident of the city, any person charged
with the collection of rent, or the payment of taxes on such property, or
having control thereof in any way shall be regarded as the agent of the owner,
and service upon such person shall have the like force and effect as though
personal service were made upon the owner thereof. If it appear in any such
return, however, that the owner is a non-resident, or that neither such owner
nor agent could be found, one publication of a copy of the resolution in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city shall be deemed sufficient notice
to such owner. If such sidewalks, curbing, or gutters be not constructed or
repaired within thirty (30) days from the service of notice, or the completion
of the publication, the mayor may proceed by direct employment of labor, or by
contract to do, or have done, the said construction or repair at the expense of
the owner, as in the case of other improvements, and all such expense shall be
reported by the mayor to the council. The council shall thereupon by ordinance
assess the cost and expense thereof upon the owners of all the property
bounding or abutting thereon, and such assessments shall be collected in the
same manner with a penalty of five per cent (5) and interest for failure to pay
at the time fixed by the assessment resolution.
Further Proceedings Unnecessary.
   Section 95.   No proceedings for the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbings, and gutters, and levying assessments therefor, shall be necessary
other than the proceedings required under this and the preceding section. In
any case in which special assessments may be made on property for all the cost
of constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbings, or gutters, such assessment
within the limit of thirty-three and one-third per cent (33 1/3) of the real
value of the property shall be a valid assessment thereon, except as provided
in Section
88 of this Charter.
Assessment Bonds.
   Section 96.   The council may at any time borrow money and authorize the
issuance of notes or bonds therefor in anticipation of the collection of
assessments levied for the purpose of paying the cost of constructing or
repairing sidewalks, which are to be or have been constructed by the council
upon the failure of the owners of the property to construct or repair the same,
pursuant to notice as hereinbefore provided.
Alterations or Modifications in Contract.
   Section 97.   When it becomes necessary, in the opinion of the mayor or in
the prosecution of any work or improvement under contract to make alterations
or modifications in such contract, such alterations or modifications shall be
made only upon the order of said mayor in writing. Provided, however, that such
alteration must be approved by the council in case it involves an additional
expenditure exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000). No such order shall be
effective until the price to be paid for the work and material, or both, under
the altered or modified contract, has been agreed upon in writing and signed by
the contractor and the mayor in behalf of the city.
(Amended 11-5-2002)
Plat of Subdivision.
   Section 98.   A proprietor of lots or grounds within the city who subdivides
or lays them out for sale, shall cause to be made an accurate map or plat of
such subdivision, describing with certainty all grounds laid out, or granted
for streets, alleys, ways, commons, or other public uses. Lots sold or intended
for sale shall be numbered by progressive numbers, or described by the squares
in which situated, and the precise length and width shall be given of each lot
sold, or intended for sale. Such map or plat shall be subscribed by the
proprietor, or his agent duly authorized in writing, acknowledged before an
officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds, who shall certify the
acknowledgment of the instrument; and recorded in the office of the county
recorder.
Fee Shall Vest in City.
   Section 99.   The map or plat so recorded shall thereupon be a sufficient
conveyance to vest in the city the fee of the parcel or parcels of land
designated or intended for streets, alleys, ways, commons, or other public
uses, to be held in the corporate name in trust to and for the uses and
purposes in the instrument set forth, expressed, designated or intended.
Planning Commissioners.
   Section 100.   There is hereby created and established a planning commission
of six members, consisting of the mayor, the president of the board of park
commissioners, and four citizens of the municipal corporation who shall serve
without compensation and shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of six (6)
years each, except that the terms of two of the members of the first commission
shall be for three (3) years. They shall have all of the powers and authorities
set forth in Ohio Revised Code Section 713.01 to 713.27 as they now exist or
are hereinafter amended or enlarged, and in addition thereto shall have all of
the powers and authorities hereinbefore vested by the council of the City of
Shelby, Ohio, in the platting commission as it existed to the date of this
amendment. The planning commission shall elect its officers and shall make
rules and regulations as they be permitted by law and as it shall deem
necessary. They shall hold such meetings as they deem necessary or desirable.
(Amended 1-1-1964)
Effect of Such Platting.
   Section 101.   No streets or alleys, except those laid down on such plat and
bearing the approval of the platting commissioners, as hereinbefore provided,
shall subsequently in any way be accepted as public streets, or alleys, nor
shall any public funds be expended in the repair or improvement of streets and
alleys subsequently laid out and not on such plat. This restriction shall not
apply to a street or alley laid out by the city, nor to streets, alleys, or
public grounds laid out on a plat by the platting commissioners, when the
owners of the grounds so platted shall have accepted the same, either by
endorsing their acceptance upon such plat, or by selling lots with reference to
the streets or alleys laid out thereon. 
Streets and Public Grounds.
   Section 102.   The council shall provide for the care, supervision, control
and improvement of public highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, public
grounds, bridges, aqueducts, and viaducts, within the city, and shall cause
them to be kept open, in repair and free from nuisance.
Alteration of Streets.
   Section 103.   When it deems it necessary the council may cause any street,
alley, or public highway to be opened, straightened, altered, diverted,
narrowed, or widened.
Dedication of Streets.
   Section 104.   No street or alley dedicated to public use by the proprietor
of ground in the city shall be deemed a public street or alley, or under the
care or control of the council, unless the dedication is accepted and confirmed
by ordinance passed for such purpose.
Vacation or Change of Name.
   Section 105.   The council vacating any street or part of street or changing
the name of any street may include in one ordinance the change of name or the
vacation or narrowing of more than one street, avenue, or alley, but before
vacating any street or part thereof, or narrowing any street, the council shall
first pass a resolution declaring its intention so to do. The clerk of the
council shall cause notice of such declaration to be served in the manner that
service of summons is required to be made upon all persons whose property abuts
upon the part of the street affected by the proposed vacation or narrowing and
by publication once in one newspaper of general circulation in the city as to
all the persons who cannot be personally served. Said notice shall state the
time and place when objections can be heard before the board of revision of
assessments. Upon the report of the board of revision of assessments approving
the proposed vacation or narrowing, the council may by ordinance declare such
vacation or narrowing, and such order of council vacating or narrowing a street
or alley which has been dedicated to public use by the proprietor, shall, to
the extent to which it is vacated or narrowed operate as a revocation of the
acceptance thereof by council, but the right of way and easement therein of any
lot owner shall not be impaired thereby.
Taxation.
   Section 106.   The council shall levy taxes within the limitations provided
by law for the purpose of paying the expense of constructing improvements and
exercising the powers of the city.
APPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY
Appropriation.
   Section 107.   Property within the corporate limits of the city may be
appropriated for any public or municipal purpose, and subject only to the
limitations thereon imposed by the constitution of the state, such
appropriation shall be made in the manner herein provided. By such
appropriation the city may acquire a fee simple title or any less estate,
easement or use. Appropriation of property located outside the corporate limits
of the city shall be made according to the requirements of, and in the manner
provided by the general law.
Declaratory Resolution.
   Section 108.   When it is deemed necessary to appropriate property the
council shall adopt a resolution declaring such intent, defining the purpose of
the appropriation, setting forth a pertinent description of the property, and
the estate or interest therein desired to be appropriated.
Notice.
   Section 109.   Immediately upon the adoption of such a resolution, for which
but one reading shall be necessary, the clerk of the council shall cause
written notice thereof to be given to the owner, person in possession thereof,
or having an interest of record in every piece of land sought to be
appropriated, or to his authorized agent; and such notice shall be served by
the director of finance and public record, and return made in the manner
provided by law for the service and return of summons in civil actions. If such
owner, person or agent cannot be found, notice shall be given by publication
once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, and the council may thereafter pass an ordinance directing such
appropriation to proceed.
Further Proceedings.
   Section 110.   Upon the passage of such ordinance the director of law shall
make application to a court of competent jurisdiction or to a judge thereof in
vacation, which application shall describe as correctly as possible the land or
other property to be appropriated, the interest or estate therein to be taken,
the object for which the land is desired, and the name of the owner of each lot
or parcel thereof, and all the subsequent proceedings with regard thereto shall
be in the manner provided by general law for the appropriation of property by
municipal corporations in this State.
FRANCHISES
Grant.
   Section 111.   The council may, by ordinance, grant permission to any
individual, company or corporation to construct and operate a public utility in
the streets and public grounds of the city but not for a period exceeding
twenty years. It may prescribe in the ordinance the kind and quality of service
or the product to be furnished, the rate or rates to be charged therefor, and
any terms and conditions conducive to the public interest; and also the manner
in which the streets and public grounds shall be used and occupied. And no
franchise shall be considered an emergency measure and shall be subject to
referendum as hereinbefore provided.
Renewals.
   Section 112.   The council may, by ordinance, renew any grant for the
construction or operation of any utility, at its expiration, upon such terms as
may be conducive to the public interest. All such grants and renewals thereof
shall reserve to the city the right to purchase all the property of the utility
in the streets and highways and elsewhere used in, or useful for the operation
of the utility, at a price either fixed in the ordinance, or to be fixed in the
manner provided by the ordinance making the grant or the renewal of the grant.
Nothing in such ordinance shall prevent the city from acquiring the property of
any such utility by the condemnation proceedings or in any other lawful mode;
but all such methods of acquisition shall be alternative to the power of
purchase, reserved in the grant or renewal as hereinbefore provided.
   No ordinance making such grant or renewal shall be valid unless it shall
expressly provide therein that the price to be paid by the city for the
property that may be acquired by it from such utility, by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, shall exclude all value of such grant or renewal.
   Upon the acquisition by the city of the property of any utility by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, all grants or renewals shall at once terminate.
   Section 113.   The council may, by ordinance, grant to any individual,
company or corporation operating a public utility, the right to extend the
appliances and services of such utility. All such extensions shall become a
part of the aggregate property of the utility and shall be subject to all the
obligations and reserved rights in favor of the city applicable to the property
of the utility by virtue of the ordinance providing for its construction and
operation. The right to use and maintain any such extension shall expire with
the original grant of the utility to which the extension was made or any
renewal thereof.
No Exclusive Grant.
   Section 114.   No rights to construct, maintain, or operate any public
utility in the city of Shelby shall be exclusive.
Consents.
   Section 115.   No consent of the owner of property abutting on any highway
or public ground shall be required by the council as a condition of its
authority to authorize the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of
any public utility by original grant or renewal, unless such public utility is
of such a character that its construction or operation is an additional burden
upon the rights of the property owners on such highways or public grounds.
Regulations.
   Section 116.   The council shall at all times control the distribution of
space in, over, under or across all streets or public grounds occupied by
public utility fixtures. All rights granted for the construction and operation
of public utilities shall be subject to the continuing right of council to
require such reconstruction, re-location, change or discontinuance of the
appliances used by the utility in the streets, alleys, avenues, and highways of
the city, as shall in the opinion of the council be necessary in the public
interest.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Official Bonds.
   Section 117.   The council in fixing the salary of any officer, clerk or
employee shall determine whether such officer, clerk, or employee shall give a
bond, the amount thereof, which bond shall be given by such officer, clerk or
employee, with security to the approval of the mayor and council, and be then
filed with the director of finance and public record.
Continuance of Present Officers.
   Section 118.   All persons holding office at the time this charter goes into
effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until
provision shall have been otherwise made in accordance with this charter for
the performance or discontinuance of the duties of any such office. When such
provision shall have been made the term of any such officer shall expire and
the office be deemed abolished. The powers which are conferred and the duties
which are imposed upon any officer, commission, board or department of the city
under the laws of the state shall, if such office or department is abolished by
this charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board or
department upon whom are imposed corresponding functions, powers and duties
hereunder.
   Section 119.   All ordinances, resolutions and rules of departments in force
at the time of the taking effect of this charter, not inconsistent with its
provisions, shall continue in force until amended or repealed.
Oath of Office.
   Section 120.   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, to be filed
and kept in the office of the director of finance and public record, that he
will in all respects faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Interest in Contract or Supplies.
   Section 121.   No officer or employee of the city shall have a personal
interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city or be personally
interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any supplies,
material, service or land, except on behalf of the city as an officer or
employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in
office, and any officer or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit
his office.
Continuance of Contracts.
   Section 122.   All contracts entered into by the city or for its benefit
prior to the taking effect of this charter shall continue in full force and
effect. All public work begun prior to the taking effect of this charter shall
be continued and perfected hereunder. Public improvements for which legislative
steps shall have been taken under laws in force at the time this charter takes
effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such
laws.
Amendments.
   Section 123.   Amendments to this charter may be submitted to the electors
of the city by a two-thirds vote of the council, or when a petition signed by
ten per cent (10%) of the electors of the city, setting forth any such proposed
amendment has been filed with the election authorities in the manner and form
prescribed herein for the submission of ordinances by an initiative petition.
   The ordinance providing for the submission of any such amendment shall be
submitted to the electors at the next regular municipal election if one shall
occur not less than sixty (60) nor more than one hundred and twenty (120) days
after its passage; otherwise it shall provide for the submission of the
amendment at a special election to be called and held within the time
aforesaid.
   Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election the director of
finance and public record shall provide notice of proposed amendments in a
newspaper of general circulation advertising the proposed amendments in
accordance with State law.
   If such proposed amendment be approved by the majority of the electors
voting thereon it shall become a part of the charter at the time fixed therein.
(Amended 6-9-1981)
When Charter Takes Effect.
   Section 124.   For the purpose of electing officers and exercising the
powers of the city as provided herein, this charter shall take effect from the
time of its approval by the electors of the city. For the purpose of
establishing departments, divisions and offices and distributing the functions
thereof, and for all other purposes it shall take effect on the first day of
January, 1922.
PART TWO:  ADMINISTRATION
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
202.   CODIFIED ORDINANCES
         
204.   OFFICIAL STANDARDS
         
206.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
         
208.   VISION AND MISSION STATEMENTS AND STRATEGIC ACTION PLAN
         
210.   PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
         
212.   ETHICS POLICY
         
214.   CONTRACTS
CHAPTER 202:  CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
   
202.01   Designation; citation; headings
   
202.02   General definitions
   
202.03   Rules of construction
   
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal
   
202.05   Construction of section references
   
202.06   General repealer; conflicts
   
202.07   Determination of legislative intent
   
202.08   Separability
 
   
202.99   General code penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ordinances and resolutions, see
Ch. 222
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions, see §
606.06
Statutory reference:
   Codification in book form, see R.C. § 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid, see R.C. §§ 1905.30, 2947.14
§ 202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This volume consists of all ordinances and resolutions of a general and
permanent nature of the municipality, revised, codified, arranged, numbered and
consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such
shall be known and may be designated as the Codified Ordinances of Shelby,
Ohio, 2009, for which designation "Codified Ordinances" or "this Code" may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in these Codified Ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.01)
§ 202.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in these Codified Ordinances of Shelby, Ohio, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   (a)   "And." May be read "or", and "or" may be read "and", if the sense
requires it.
   (b)   "Another." When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
   (c)   "Bond." Includes an undertaking.
   (d)   "Child." Includes child by adoption.
   (e)   "Council." The legislative authority of the municipality.
   (f)   "County." Richland County, Ohio.
   (g)   "Fire Chief."  Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if a
Fire Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the
Fire Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   (h)   "Imprisoned." Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   (i)   "Internet." The international computer network of both federal and
non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the World Wide Web.
   (j)   "Keeper" or "proprietor." Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (k)   "Land" or "real estate." Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   (l)   "Legislative authority." The legislative authority of the
municipality.
   (m)   "May." The action referred to is permissive.
   (n)   "Municipality" or "city." When used in this Code, shall denote the
City of Shelby, Ohio irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   (o)   "O.A.C."  Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (p)   "Oath." Includes affirmation; and "swear" includes affirm.
   (q)   "Owner." When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property.
   (r)   "Person." Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership and association.
   (s)   "Personal property." Includes all property except real property.
   (t)   "Plan of sewerage," "system of sewerage," "sewer" and "sewers."
Includes sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   (u)   "Premises." As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (v)   "Property." Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   (w)   "Public authority." Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any
duly authorized public official.
   (x)   "Public place." Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (y)   "Real property." Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   (z)   "Registered mail." Includes certified mail; and "certified mail"
includes registered mail.
   (aa)   "Revised Code" or "R.C." Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   (bb)   "Shall." The action referred to is mandatory.
   (cc)   "Sidewalk." That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (dd)   "State." The State of Ohio.
   (ee)   "Street." Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   (ff)   "Tenant" or "occupant." As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of the premises, alone or with others.
   (gg)   "Undertaking." Includes a bond.
   (hh)   "Week." Seven consecutive days.
   (ii)   "Whoever." Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   (jj)   "Writing." Includes printing.
   (kk)   "Written" or "in writing."  Include any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   (ll)   "Year." Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense.  As used in this Code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   "Legal holiday", as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year's Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as Presidents' Day;
         D.   The day designated in the "Act of June 28, 1968", 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         F.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         G.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         H.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran's Day;
         I.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         J.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day;
         K.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included.  If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
§ 202.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of this Code does not revive the
provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of this Code does not, except as
provided in division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of this Code, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to this Code as
amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
§ 202.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (b)   References in this Code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this Code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this Code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (c)   A reference to any portion of a provision of the Code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (d)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 202.06  GENERAL REPEALER; CONFLICTS.
   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
municipality, and all parts of the same, enacted prior to the date of the
adoption of this Code and inconsistent or in conflict with any of the
provisions of this code, are hereby repealed, save and except any ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same, expressly excepted from
repeal by the ordinance that adopts this code. No ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation, or part of the same, of the municipality, that is not
inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this code and/or that
can be reasonably interpreted to be compatible with the provisions of this
code, shall be deemed to be repealed by the adoption of this code. Such
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and all parts of the same,
shall continue to be viable and enforceable by the municipality.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this Code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and a provision of any standard
code adopted by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision that
establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control. In the event of a
conflict between any of the provisions of this code and any provision of state
law, including rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to state law, the
state law, rule or regulation shall control.
   (c)   If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a
number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (d)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both.  If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
   (e)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are
irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails.
   (f)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different meetings
of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments are to
be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each.  If the
amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment
prevails.  The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an
earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier
amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.  Amendments
are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into
simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
§ 202.07  DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (a)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the state and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended;
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(R.C. § 1.47)
   (b)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(R.C. § 1.48)
   (c)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of Council may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction;
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.49)
§ 202.08  SEPARABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these Codified Ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 202.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in this Code or in any ordinance of the municipality, any
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation continues or occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
CHAPTER 204:  OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
   
204.01   Official benchmark; grade levels
   
204.02   Hassler Memorial Bridge
   
204.03   Commemorative dates
   
204.04   Fee for photocopying; certified copies
   
204.05   Official floral emblem
 
   
204.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   State flag and other insignia, see R.C. §§ 5.01 et seq.
   State legal holidays, see R.C. §§ 1.14, 5.20 et seq.
   State seals, see R.C. §§ 5.10 et seq.
   State standard of time, see R.C. § 1.04
   Weights and measures, see R.C. § 901.10, Ch. 1327
§ 204.01  OFFICIAL BENCHMARK; GRADE LEVELS.
   (a)   The United States Geodetic Survey benchmark disk set vertically in the
west brick face of the United States Post Office and near the northwestern
corner thereof, designated as "D 249", located at latitude North 40° 52' 58"
and longitude West 82° 39' 42" (scaled), and having an elevation of 338.563
meters (1,111.30 feet) (adjusted) is established as an official benchmark for
the city.
   (b)   All grade levels within the city shall be measured from the United
States Geodetic Survey marker nearest to the proposed work or construction.
(Ord. 18-2003, passed 5-5-2003)
§ 204.02  HASSLER MEMORIAL BRIDGE.
   (a)   The Whitney Avenue bridge over the Black Fork of the Mohican River is
hereby designated and shall be known as "The Rev. Mayor Edgar S. Hassler
Memorial Bridge."
   (b)   The Department of Public Service, Division of Streets and Sewers, is
hereby directed to place appropriate signage indicating the designation.
(Ord. 55-98, passed 11-2-1998)
§ 204.03  COMMEMORATIVE DATES.
   (a)   The following dates are hereby established for the commemoration of
significant events in the history of the city and state:
      (1)   March 1 shall be known as "Ohio Statehood Day" to recognize the
entrance of the seventeenth state into the Union.
      (2)   June 3 shall be known as "James E. Henkel Day" to honor the memory
of the late mayor of the City of Shelby who was born on this day in 1945.
      (3)   June 26 shall be known as "Founding Day" in commemoration of James
Gamble's signing of his plat of the Town of Shelby in 1834.
      (4)   July 18 shall be known as "Tuby Day" in recognition of the
incorporation of the Ohio Seamless Tube Company in 1908.
      (5)   August 9 shall be known as "Charter Day" to honor the adoption of
the Charter of the city by the voters in 1921.
      (6)   October 14 shall be known as "Incorporation Day" in recognition of
the establishment of the Incorporated Village of Shelby in 1853.
      (7)   November 28 shall be known as "Dawn Powell Day" to celebrate the
1896 birth of this distinguished author and former resident.
   (b)   Nothing herein shall be interpreted as creating additional paid
holidays for employees of the city.
(Ord. 21-99, passed 6-8-1999; Ord. 78-2000, passed 1-16-2001; Ord. 2-2003,
passed 2-18-2003; Ord. 48-2008, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 204.04  FEE FOR PHOTOCOPYING; CERTIFIED COPIES.
   (a)   No department, office, officer or employee of the city, being the
custodian of any document and/or official record, shall charge more than $0.05
per page for photocopying the document and/or official record.
   (b)   No department, office, officer or employee of the city, being the
custodian of any document and/or official record, shall charge more than $2.00
to certify a copy of the first page of the document and/or official record and
$1.00 each for subsequent pages.
(Ord. 60-99, passed 11-15-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Records policy, see §
292.02
§ 204.05  OFFICIAL FLORAL EMBLEM.
   The sunflower (genus Helianthus) is hereby designated as the city's official
floral emblem. In her nomination of the sunflower, Taylor Sutter, a Central
Elementary School sixth grader wrote, "Each petal on the sunflower could
represent the number of wonderful families in Shelby and the number of schools
and businesses."
(Ord. 56-2005, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 204.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §
204.04 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty
provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 60-99, passed 11-15-1999)
CHAPTER 206:  WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
206.01   Division of city into wards
   
206.02   Boundaries of wards
Cross-reference:
   Boundaries of zoning districts, see §
1266.05
   Council members to be elected from wards, see Charter §
3
Statutory reference:
   Division of city into wards, see R.C. § 731.06
   Voting precincts, see R.C. § 3501.18
§ 206.01  DIVISION OF CITY INTO WARDS.
   The city is hereby divided into four wards, and the boundaries thereof shall
be such as are hereinafter set forth, which boundaries are so fixed that each
ward shall contain as nearly as practicable an equal number of inhabitants.
(1923 Code, § 1)
§ 206.02  BOUNDARIES OF WARDS.
   The boundaries of the wards of the city are as follows:
   (a)   First Ward.  The first ward shall contain all that territory bounded
as follows: beginning for the same at the intersection of the centerlines of
the Black Fork of the Mohican River and West Main Street; thence westerly along
the centerline of West Main Street to the west corporation line; thence
generally northerly and easterly along the corporation line to the centerline
of North Gamble Street; thence southerly along the centerline of North Gamble
Street to the centerline of West State Street; thence westerly along the
centerline of West State Street to the centerline of Leslie Lane; thence
southerly along the centerline of Leslie Lane to the centerline of Maple
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Maple Street to the centerline
of North Gamble Street; thence southerly along the centerline of North Gamble
Street to the centerline of West Smiley Avenue; thence easterly along the
centerline of West Smiley Avenue to the centerline of the Black Fork of the
Mohican River; thence southerly along the centerline of the Black Fork of the
Mohican River to the point of beginning.
   (b)   Second Ward.  The second ward shall contain all that territory bounded
as follows:  beginning for the same at the intersection of the centerlines of
East Main Street and Mansfield Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Mansfield Avenue to the centerline of Monroe Avenue; thence southwesterly along
the centerline and the extension of the centerline of Monroe Avenue to the
centerline of the Ashland Railway right-of-way; thence southerly along the
centerline of the Ashland Railway right-of-way to the extension of the
centerline of Simeon Avenue; thence westerly along the extension of the
centerline and the centerline of Simeon Avenue to the centerline of Park
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Park Avenue to the centerline
of East Tucker Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of East Tucker
Avenue to the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River; thence
southerly along the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River to the
south corporation line; thence generally westerly and northerly along the
corporation line to the centerline of West Main Street; thence easterly along
the centerlines of West and East Main Streets to the point of beginning.
   (c)   Third Ward.  The third ward shall contain all the territory bounded as
follows:  beginning for the same at the intersection of the centerlines of
Mansfield Avenue and East Main Streets; thence westerly along the centerline of
East Main Street to the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River;
thence northerly along the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River to
the centerline of West Smiley Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of
West Smiley Avenue to the centerline of North Gamble Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of North Gamble Street to the centerline of Maple Street;
thence westerly along the centerline of Maple Street to the centerline of
Leslie Lane; thence northerly along the centerline of Leslie Lane to the
centerline of West State Street; thence easterly along the centerline of West
State Street to the centerline of North Gamble Street; thence northerly along
the centerline of North Gamble Street to the north corporation line; thence
generally easterly and southerly along the corporation line to the centerline
of East Main Street; thence westerly along the centerline of East Main Street
to the centerline of Louise Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of
Louise Drive to the centerline of Grand Boulevard Extension; thence westerly
along the centerlines of Grand Boulevard Extension and Grand Boulevard to the
centerline of Wentz Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Wentz
Avenue to the de facto centerline of Parkwood Drive; thence westerly along the
de facto centerline of Parkwood Drive to the centerline of Mansfield Avenue;
thence northerly along the centerline of Mansfield Avenue to the point of
beginning.
   (d)   Fourth Ward.  The fourth ward shall contain all that territory bounded
as follows:  beginning for the same at the intersection of the centerlines of
Wentz Avenue and Grand Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerlines of
Grand Boulevard and Grand Boulevard Extension to the centerline of Louise
Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Louise Drive to the centerline
of East Main Street; thence easterly along the centerline of East Main Street
to the east corporation line; thence generally southerly and westerly along the
corporation line to the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River;
thence northerly along the centerline of the Black Fork of the Mohican River to
the centerline of East Tucker Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of
East Tucker Avenue to the centerline of Park Avenue; thence southerly along the
centerline of Park Avenue to the centerline of Simeon Avenue; thence easterly
along the centerline and the extension of the centerline of Simeon Avenue to
the centerline of Ashland Railway right-of-way; thence northerly along the
centerline of the Ashland Railway right-of-way to the extension of the
centerline of Monroe Avenue; thence northeasterly along the extension of the
centerline and the centerline of Monroe Avenue to the centerline of Mansfield
Avenue; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Mansfield Avenue to the de
facto centerline of Parkwood Drive; thence easterly along the de facto
centerline of Parkwood Drive to the centerline of Wentz Avenue; thence
northerly along the centerline of Wentz Avenue to the point of beginning.
(1923 Code, § 2)  (Ord. 33-2011, passed 11-7- 2011)
CHAPTER 208:  VISION AND MISSION STATEMENTS AND STRATEGIC ACTION PLAN
Section
   
208.01   Vision statement
   
208.02   Mission statement
   
208.03   Strategic action plan
§ 208.01  VISION STATEMENT.
   The vision statement of the city is: "To maintain the City of Shelby, Ohio
as a great place to grow." City officials and employees will diligently respond
to the needs of all who live, work, visit and invest in this community.
(Ord. 60-2005, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 208.02  MISSION STATEMENT.
   To promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the entire
community and to improve quality of life, the city will provide high quality,
cost-effective governmental services.
(Ord. 60-2005, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 208.03  STRATEGIC ACTION PLAN.
   (a)   The full document and appendixes of the City of Shelby, Ohio Strategic
Action Plan 2010-2030 shall be adopted and shall be available in the Mayor’s
office, Finance Director/Clerk of Council’s office, Law Director’s office,
Project Coordinator’s office, Public Services/Utilities Deputy Director’s
office, Health Commissioner’s office, the local public library, and given to
each member of City Council and each member of the Planning Commission to be
passed on to successors. Any additional officials or employees having
responsibility for any part of the strategic plan shall be determined as
necessary.
   (b)   In May of each year, it shall be the cooperative responsibility of the
Planning Commission and the Community and Economic Development Committee of the
City Council to review the Strategic Action Plan 2010-2030 with the city
administration and department heads to determine the successful completion,
current status, or reasonable delay of the recommended action plans.
   (c)   The annual review of the Strategic Action Plan 2010-2030 shall be a
document distributed to all the offices and personnel mentioned in division (a)
of this section.
(Ord. 60-2005, passed 1-17-2006; Ord. 12-2010,  passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 12-2015,
passed 5-18-2015)
CHAPTER 210:  PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
Section
   
210.01   Mission statement
   
210.02   Definitions
   
210.03   Response timeframe
   
210.04   Handling requests
   
210.05   Electronic records
   
210.06   Denial and redaction of records
   
210.07   Copying and mailing costs
   
210.08   Managing records
   
210.09   Applicability
§ 210.01  MISSION STATEMENT.
   Openness leads to a better informed citizenry, which leads to better
government and better public policy.  It is the mission and intent of the City
of Shelby at all times to comply fully with and abide by both the spirit and
the letter of Ohio's Public Records Act.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   PUBLIC RECORD. A record that is being kept by the city at the time a public
records request is made, subject to applicable exemptions from disclosure under
Ohio or federal law. All public records must be organized and maintained in
such a way that they can be made available for inspection and copying.
   RECORD. Includes the following: a document in any format - paper, electronic
(including, but not  limited to, business e-mail) - that is created, received
by, or comes under the jurisdiction of the city that documents the
organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other
activities of the city.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.03  RESPONSE TIMEFRAME.
   (a)   Public records are to be available for inspection during regular
administrative business hours.  Public records must be made available for
inspection promptly.  Copies of public records must be made available within a
reasonable period of time.  "Promptly" and "reasonable" take into account the
volume of records requested, the proximity of the location where the records
are stored, the necessity for any legal review and redaction, and other facts
and circumstances of the records requested.
   (b)   It is the goal of the City of Shelby that all requests for public
records should be acknowledged in writing or, if feasible, satisfied within
three business days following the city's receipt of the request.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.04  HANDLING REQUESTS.
   (a)   No specific language is required to make a request for public records.
However, the requester must at least identify the records requested with
sufficient clarity to allow the city to identify, retrieve, and review the
records.
   (b)   The requester does not have to put a records request in writing and
does not have to provide his or her identity or the intended use of the
requested public record(s). It is the city's general policy that this
information not be requested. However, the law does permit the city to ask for
a written request, the requester's identity, and/or the intended use of the
information requested, but only if (1) a written request or disclosure of
identity or intended use would benefit the requester by enhancing the city's
ability to identify, locate, or deliver the public records that have been
requested; and (2) the requester is first told that a written request is not
required and that the requester may decline to reveal the requester's identity
or intended use.
   (c)   In processing the request, the city does not have an obligation to
create new records or perform a search or research for information in the
city's records. An electronic record is deemed to exist so long as a computer
is already programmed to produce the record through the city's standard use of
sorting, filtering, or querying features. Although not required by law, the
city should consider generating new records when it makes sense and is
practical under the circumstances.
   (d)   In processing a request for inspection of a public record, a city
employee may accompany the requester during inspection to make certain original
records are not taken or altered.
   (e)   A copy of the most recent edition of the Ohio Sunshine Laws Manual is
available via the Ohio Attorney General's website (www.OhioAttorneyGeneral.gov/
YellowBook) for the purpose of keeping employees of the city and the public
educated as to the city's obligations under Ohio's Public Records Act, Ohio's
Open Meetings Act, records retention laws, and the Personal Information Systems
Act.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.05  ELECTRONIC RECORDS.
   (a)   Records in the form of e-mail, text messaging, and instant messaging,
including those sent and received via a hand-held communications device, are to
be treated in the same fashion as records in other formats, such as paper or
audiotape.
   (b)   Public record content transmitted to or from private accounts or
personal devices is subject to disclosure.  All employees or representatives of
the city are required to retain their e-mail records and other electronic
records in accordance with applicable records retention schedules.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.06  DENIAL AND REDACTION OF RECORDS.
   (a)   If the requester makes an ambiguous or overly broad request or has
difficulty in making a request such that the city cannot reasonably identify
what public records are being requested, the request may be denied, but the
city must then provide the requester an opportunity to revise the request by
informing the requester of the manner in which records are maintained and
accessed by the city.
   (b)   If the city withholds, redacts, or otherwise denies requested records,
it must provide an explanation, including legal authority, for the denial(s).
If the initial request was made in writing, the explanation must also be in
writing. If portions of a record are public and portions are exempt, the exempt
portions may be redacted and the rest must be released. When making public
records available for public inspection or copying, the city shall notify the
requester of any redaction or make the redaction plainly visible.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.07  COPYING AND MAILING COSTS.
   (a)   Those seeking public records may be charged only the actual cost of
making copies, not labor. The charge for paper copies is $0.05 per page. The
charge for electronic files downloaded to a compact disc is $1.00 per disc.
   (b)   A requester may be required to pay in advance for the actual costs
involved in providing the copy. The requester may choose whether to have the
record duplicated upon paper, upon the same medium on which the public record
is kept, or upon any other medium on which the city determines that the record
can reasonably be duplicated as an integral part of the city's normal
operations.
   (c)   If a requester asks that documents be delivered, he or she may be
charged the actual cost of the postage and mailing supplies or other actual
costs of delivery. There is no charge for e-mailed documents.
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.08  MANAGING RECORDS.
   The city's records are subject to records retention schedules. The city's
current schedules are available at City Hall, a location readily available to
the public as required by R.C. § 149.43(B)(2).
(Ord. 45-2009, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 210.09  APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, departments,
boards, and commissions of the city.  No later than 30 days after its effective
date, the Clerk of Council shall cause a copy of this chapter to be posted
prominently at all locations where public records are kept, including, but not
limited to, City Hall, Police Department, Fire Department, Health Department,
Municipal Utilities Office, Water Treatment Plant, Wastewater Treatment Plant,
Municipal Light Plant, City Garage, Electric Distribution Garage, Seltzer Pool,
and Parks Department Garage.
(Ord. 20-2019, passed 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 212:  ETHICS POLICY
Section
   
212.01   Introduction
   
212.02   General standards of ethical conduct
   
212.03   Financial disclosure
   
212.04   Penalties
§ 212.01  INTRODUCTION.
   It is policy of the City of Shelby to carry out its mission in accordance
with the strictest ethical guidelines and to ensure that city officials - both
elected and appointed - and employees conduct themselves in a manner that
fosters public confidence in the integrity of the city, its processes, and its
accomplishments.
(Ord. 51-2009, passed 1-4-2010)
§ 212.02  GENERAL STANDARDS OF ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   City officials and employees shall, at all times, abide by protections
to the public embodied in Ohio's ethics laws, as found in R.C. Chapters 102 and
2921, and as interpreted by the Ohio Ethics Commission and Ohio courts. [A copy
of these laws is provided by the City of Shelby, and receipt acknowledged, as
required in R.C. § 102.09(D).] Officials and employees must conduct themselves,
at all times, in a manner that avoids favoritism, bias, and the appearance of
impropriety.
   (b)   A general summary of the restraints upon the conduct of all officials
and employees includes, but is not limited to, those listed below. No official
or employee shall:
      (1)   Solicit or accept anything of value from anyone doing business with
the city;
      (2)   Solicit or accept employment from anyone doing business with the
city, unless the official or employee completely withdraws from city activity
regarding the party offering employment, and the City approves the withdrawal;
      (3)   Use his or her public position to obtain benefits for the official
or employee, a family member, or anyone with whom the official or employee has
a business or employment relationship;
      (4)   Be paid or accept any form of compensation for personal services
rendered on a matter before any board, commission, or other body of the city,
unless the official or employee qualifies for the exception, and files the
statement, described in R.C. § 102.04(D);
      (5)   Hold or benefit from a contract with, authorized by, or approved
by, the city, (the Ethics Law does except some limited stockholdings, and some
contracts objectively shown as the lowest cost services, where all criteria
under R.C. § 2921.42 are met);
      (6)   Vote, authorize, recommend, or in any other way use his or her
position to secure approval of a city contract (including employment or
personal services) in which the official or employee, a family member, or
anyone with whom the official or employee has a business or employment
relationship, has an interest;
      (7)   Solicit or accept honoraria [see R.C. §§ 102.01(H) and 102.03(H)];
      (8)   During public service and for one year after leaving public
service, represent any person, in any fashion, before any public agency, with
respect to a matter in which the official or employee personally participated
while serving with the city;
      (9)   Use or disclose confidential information protected by law, unless
appropriately authorized; or
      (10)   Use or authorize the use of his or her title, the name “City of
Shelby,” or “Shelby,” or the city's logo in a manner that suggests impropriety,
favoritism, or bias by the city or the official or employee.
   (c)   For purposes of this policy:
      (1)   “Anything of value” includes anything of monetary value, including,
but not limited to, money, gifts, food or beverages, social event tickets and
expenses, travel expenses, golf outings, consulting fees, compensation, or
employment. “Value” means worth greater than de minimis or nominal.
      (2)   “Anyone doing business with the City of Shelby” includes, but is
not limited to, any person, corporation, or other party that is doing or
seeking to do business with, regulated by, or has interests before the City of
Shelby.
(Ord. 51-2009, passed 1-4-2010)
§ 212.03  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   Every city official or employee required to file a financial disclosure
statement shall file a complete and accurate statement with the Ethics
Commission by April 15 of each year. An official or employee elected,
appointed, or employed to a filing position after February 15 shall file a
statement within 90 days of appointment or employment.
(Ord. 51-2009, passed 1-4-2010)
§ 212.04  PENALTIES.
   Failure of any city official or employee to abide by this Ethics Policy or
to comply with the Ethics Law and related statutes will result in discipline,
which may include dismissal, as well as any potential civil or criminal
sanctions under the law.
(Ord. 51-2009, passed 1-4-2010)
CHAPTER 214:  CONTRACTS
Section
   
214.01   Arbitration
   
214.02   Liquidated damages
   
214.03   Dishonored check charge
§ 214.01  ARBITRATION.
   Unless approved by council, no contract for the purchase of good or services
or for a public works project shall contain language which would submit for
arbitration any dispute, claim, or question. Any contract entered into under
the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4117 shall be exempt from this section.
(Ord. 24-2013, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 214.02  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.
   Any contract for which a provision for liquidated damages is desired shall
be in accordance with the then current Schedule of Liquidated Damages as
published in the Contract Administration Manual of Procedures from the Ohio
Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 24-2013, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 214.03  DISHONORED CHECK CHARGE.
   Whenever the city accepts payment by check and the check is subsequently
returned to the city by the customer’s financial institution for lack of
sufficient funds in the customer’s account, the customer will be assessed a
dishonored check charge of $25 for each check returned.  Said assessment shall
be in addition to any other right or remedy provided for by law.
(Ord. 3-2016, passed 3-7-2016)
TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION
      Chapter
         
220.   COUNCIL
         
222.   ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
         
224.   INVESTMENT POLICY
CHAPTER 220:  COUNCIL
Section
   
220.01   Rules of order; meetings
   
220.02   Form and prior review of legislation
   
220.03   Memberships
   
220.04   Notice of hearings on property tax valuations
   
220.05   Determination of a just amount for special assessments
   
220.06   Establishing charges for the privilege of connecting to sanitary sewer
lines and water lines for all properties not previously assessed for the same
Cross-reference:
   Appropriation of funds, see Charter §§
13 et seq.
   Appropriation of real property, see Charter §§
107 et seq.
   Approval of appointments, see Charter §
27
   Authority over water and sewer connections, see Charter §
93
   Elected officials' salaries, see
Ch. 258
   Election and term, see Charter §§
3,
4,
8,
53 et seq.
   Legislative powers, see Charter §
22
   Legislative procedure, see Charter §§
8,
11,
12
   Meetings, see Charter §
7
   Oath of office, see Charter §
120
   Power to fix bonds, see Charter §§
18,
117
   Power to grant franchises, see Charter §§
111 et seq.
   Power to levy improvement assessments, see Charter §§
76 et seq.,
88
   Power to levy taxes, see Charter §
106
   Qualifications, see Charter §§
5,
6,
8
   Sewer charges, see
Ch. 1044
   Vacancy, see Charter §§
4,
6
   Vice-President, see Charter §
9
   Water generally, see
Ch. 1040
§ 220.01  RULES OF ORDER; MEETINGS.
   The following are hereby adopted and enacted as the Rules of Order of the
Council of the city:
   Rule 1.  Meetings.  Council shall hold its regularly scheduled meetings on
the first and third Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. All regular meetings of
Council shall be held at a location to be determined by the Council no less
than 72 hours prior to the meeting. Notice of the time and place of all
regularly scheduled meetings of Council shall be provided to the news media
that have requested notification. Further, any person, upon request and payment
of a reasonable fee, may obtain advance notification of all meetings at which
any specific type of public business is to be discussed.
   Rule 2.  Holidays.  When any regular meeting of Council falls upon a legal
holiday, the Council shall meet in regular session on the day following, and at
the place and hour fixed by the rule governing the same.
   Rule 3.  Opening of proceedings.  The President of Council shall take the
chair at the time appointed for the Council to meet and shall immediately call
the members to order.  In the absence of the President of Council, the Vice-
President of Council shall perform such duties as are imposed upon the
President.  In the absence of both the President and Vice-President of Council,
the Council shall appoint one of its members to act as Vice-President pro
tempore.
   Rule 4.  Presiding officer.  The presiding officer shall preserve order and
decorum and confine members in debate to the question.
      (1)   The presiding officer shall order all people who become disorderly,
other than Council members, to leave the Council Chambers.
      (2)   No person shall be allowed to address Council without receiving
permission from the presiding officer.  The presiding officer may recognize any
nonmember for the purpose of addressing Council on any question pending or on
any matter on which Council action is desired.  In such cases, the person
recognized shall address the presiding officer and state his or her name and
address and the subject matter he or she desires to discuss.  His or her
remarks must be confined to the merits of the subject at issue.  Speakers must
be courteous and avoid discussion of personalities.  No person who has had the
floor shall again be recognized until all others have been given an opportunity
to do so.  This rule shall not apply to any person specifically invited by
Council to a meeting as an advisor or consultant. Persons permitted to address
Council shall not be allowed to use disrespectful, profane, threatening, or
discourteous language; to do so shall be considered an act of disorder. Council
shall have the authority to close discussions debated and instruct the
presiding officer to proceed to the next order of business.
      (3)   Except for a bona fide religious or medical reason, no person shall
wear a hat or other headgear during meetings of Council. No person shall bring
an animal, except a service or law enforcement animal, into the Council
Chambers. No person shall use a cellular telephone or other telecommunication
device during meetings of Council; exceptions shall be made for police
officers, firefighters, and other like personnel. The presiding officer shall
order any person who violates the provisions of this division to leave Council
Chambers.
   Rule 4A.  Clerk and Assistant Clerks of Council, Pursuant to §
10 of the Charter, the Director of Finance and Public Record shall serve as
Clerk of Council.  Furthermore, the Assistant Director of Finance and Public
Record and the Secretary to the Mayor and Finance Director shall serve as
Assistant Clerks of Council.  The Clerk and Assistant Clerks shall keep the
records of the Council and perform such other duties as may be required by
ordinance or resolution by motion of Council.
   Rule 5.  Committees.
      (1)   The presiding officer shall appoint committees as deemed necessary
for the efficient handling of Council business:
         A.   Finance and Personnel;
         B.   Community and Economic Development;
         C.   Utilities and Streets;
         D.   Safety;
         E.   Public Works and General Operations.
      (2)   The Council, by a majority vote, may at any time remove any member
or members of any committee appointed by the presiding officer, and a new
member or members shall be appointed by the presiding officer.
      (3)   The Council may, from time to time, appoint special or select
committees as deemed necessary for the efficient handling of Council business.
   Rule 6.  Order of business.  The business of regular meetings of the Council
shall be transacted in the following order:
      (1)   Call to order and Pledge of Allegiance;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Receipt of the certification of the President and Clerk regarding
the journal of the proceedings of Council;
      (4)   Public comment;
      (5)   Reports from standing and special committees;
      (6)   Reports and communications from the Mayor, directors of departments
and other city officers;
      (7)   Unfinished business;
      (8)   New business;
      (9)   Reading of ordinances and resolutions;
      (10)   Miscellaneous business; and
      (11)   Adjournment.
   Rule 6A. Ordinances and Resolutions.
      (1)   An Ordinance ordinarily provides a rule of conduct and is a law
binding upon a community.  It is a declaration of a rule of conduct for the
enforcement of a right or the creation of a duty.
      (2)   A Resolution ordinarily is a declaration of Council, evincing some
purpose or intent to do some act, not the doing of the act itself.  Ordinarily
it is the intention to enter upon some enterprise of public moment, something
authorized by law that it may do.
      (3)   Resolutions shall be read on one occasion, and Ordinances shall be
read on three separate days unless dispensed with by an emergency declaration
or by law.
   Rule 7.  Voting.  Every member present shall vote on any question on the
call of the yeas and nays, unless excused by the consent of the Council, and
any member not being excused, who refuses to vote on any question when the yeas
and nays are being taken, shall be deemed guilty of contempt of the Council,
and may for such contempt be censured by a majority vote of the Council.  The
roll call shall be rotated from meeting to meeting; provided, however, that
when the Vice President of Council is presiding, he or she will be called last.
   Rule 8.  Reports of Committee and officers.  The report of any committee of
the Council or any municipal officer, upon matters referred to by the Council,
shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by the original papers upon which
the report is based, unless otherwise ordered by the Council.
   Rule 9.  Motions; when debatable; withdrawal.  When a motion is made and
seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before any debate is in
order.  Any such motion, and any amendment thereto, may be withdrawn by the
movers thereof at any time before a decision, if a majority then present shall
agree thereto.
   Rule 10.  Division of Question.  Any member may call for a division of the
question, and the same shall be divided if it comprehends questions so distinct
that, one being taken away, the other will stand as an entire question for
decision.
   Rule 11.  Referral to committee; precedence.  When there is a question of
referring a given subject to a standing committee or to a select committee, the
question of reference to a standing committee shall be put first.
   Rule 12.  Motions to adjourn.  The motion to adjourn shall always be in
order, unless the Council is engaged in voting, and the motion to adjourn, to
lay on the table, or for the previous question shall be decided without debate.
   Rule 13.  Acceptable motions; order of precedence.
      (1)   When a question or proposition is before the Council, or under
debate, no motion shall be received except the following:
         A.   To adjourn;
         B.   To lay on the table;
         C.   For the previous question;
         D.   To postpone to a certain day;
         E.   To commit;
         F.   To amend; or
         G.   To postpone indefinitely.
      (2)   The above motions shall have precedence in the order in which they
are herein arranged.
   Rule 14.  Introduction of legislation.  No legislation shall be placed upon
the Council agenda unless it first contains the name of the member of the
Council who sponsors the legislation.  No ordinance or resolution shall be
acted upon by the Council at any regular or special meeting unless it
designates a sponsor thereof and contains a brief summary of the legislation
within the title thereof.  In the event that legislation makes reference to
federal, state or local law, the specific title, chapter, section and/or
subsection associated with said federal, state or local law shall be set forth
wherever said reference appears in said proposed legislation.
   Rule 15.  Referral of business to committee.
      (1)   Any report, resolution, ordinance or matter before the Council for
consideration, before its final passage, may be referred either to a standing
committee to which the matter is most closely related or to a special committee
appointed by the Council.  Any such committee shall consider the matter thus
referred to it and report thereon to the Council without unnecessary delay.
      (2)   Any matter referred to a committee may, by a two-thirds vote of
Council at any time prior to the report of the committee, be taken from the
hands of the committee for consideration.
   Rule 16.  Limitation on debate or discussion.  No member of the Council,
while Council is in session, shall engage in debate or discussion with any
person, save another member of the Council, the presiding officer or a person
who has either been granted by the Council the privilege to address the Council
or is present at a Council meeting on invitation of the Council.
   Rule 17.  Resignations.  The resignation of a member of the Council shall be
filed with the Clerk of Council, who shall, at the next regular meeting, inform
the Council of the resignation, pursuant to §
4 of the Charter, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.
   Rule 18.  Confirmations. Prior to any confirmation vote required by the
Charter, the Mayor shall submit to the Council a summary of the nominee's
qualifications.
   Rule 19. Parliamentary authority.  The rules contained in the current
edition of Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised shall govern meetings of the
Council and its committees in all cases to which they are applicable and in
which they are not inconsistent with these Rules, the Charter, the Codified
Ordinances and/or the Ohio Revised Code.
   Rule 20.  Amendments.  These Rules may be amended or altered, or new rules
adopted, by ordinance, pursuant to §
8 of the Charter.
   Rule 21.  Suspension of the rules.  These Rules, or any of them, may be
temporarily suspended at any meeting of the Council by a concurrent vote of the
majority of all members elected, except when a greater number is required by
law or by these Rules.  The vote on such suspension shall be taken by the yeas
and nays and entered on the journal.  In case any rule herein shall not have
been adhered to by the Council, the same shall be regarded as having been
suspended.
(Ord. 5-98, passed 2-16-1998; Ord. 54-2000, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 8-2001,
passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 39-2002, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 31-2007, passed 9-4-2007;
Ord. 3-2008, passed 3-17-2008; Ord. 33-2008, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 11-2011,
passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 1-2012, passed 1-2-2012; Ord. 17-2013, passed 4-15-2013;
Ord. 1-2014, passed 5-5-2014)
§ 220.02  FORM AND PRIOR REVIEW OF LEGISLATION.
   (a)   No ordinance or resolution shall be acted upon by Council at any
regular or special meeting unless the ordinance or resolution designates the
sponsor thereof and unless the ordinance or resolution contains a brief summary
of the legislation within the title thereof.
   (b)   No ordinance or resolution shall be acted upon by Council at any
regular or special meeting unless a request for the ordinance or resolution has
been made at least six days prior to the regular or special Council meeting,
and the Director of Law has provided copies of the proposed legislation to each
member of Council at least three days prior to the regular or special Council
meeting.
   (c)   No ordinance or resolution granting authority to any officer, board or
commission to advertise for bids and enter into a contract shall be acted upon
by Council at any regular or special meeting unless the specifications therefor
are attached to and incorporated by reference and unless the specifications are
approved by Council.
(Ord. 13A-96, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 39-2003, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 220.03  MEMBERSHIPS.
   (a)   No monies over five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be expended for
organizational memberships, except for memberships required for Workers'
Compensation Group ratings, unless authorized by Council.
   (b)   The following organizational memberships are hereby authorized:
      (1)   On behalf of the City of Shelby, Greater Mansfield Area Safety
Council, Ohio Municipal League, Richland County Regional Planning Commission,
Richland Community Development Group  and Ohio Utilities Protection Service;
      (2)   On behalf of the Mayor, Mayors’ Association of Ohio;
      (3)   On behalf of the Director of Finance and Public Record, Ohio
Municipal Treasurers’ Association, Municipal Finance Officers’ Association, and
Governmental Financial Officers Association;
      (4)   On behalf of the Police Department, Ohio Association of Chiefs of
Police, DARE, ALERT (Pursuit Instructor), International Association of Chiefs
of Police, Middle Atlantic- Great Lakes Organized Crime Law Enforcement Network
(MAGLOCLEN) and Richland County Police Chiefs' Association;
      (5)   On behalf of the Fire Department, Ohio Fire Chiefs’ Association,
International Association of Fire Chiefs, National Fire Protection Association,
and Richland County Fire Chiefs’ Association;
      (6)   On behalf of the Division of Electricity and Telecommunications,
American Public Power Association, American Municipal Power, Inc., and Ohio
Municipal Electric Association;
      (7)   On behalf of the Project Coordinator, Association of State
Floodplain Managers;
      (8)   On behalf of the Division of Water, Ohio Rural Water Association
and American Waterworks Association;
      (9)   On behalf of the Shelby Municipal Court, those approved by the
Judge;
      (10)   On behalf of the Shelby City Health District, Association of Ohio
Health Commissioners; and
      (11)   On behalf of the Community and Economic Development Coordinator,
Regional Manufacturing Coalition and Mansfield/Richland County Convention and
Visitors Bureau.
(Ord. 16-2002, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 3-2003, passed 2-18-2003; Ord. 7-2005,
passed 3-7-2005; Ord. 20-2011, passed 7-5-2011)
§ 220.04  NOTICE OF HEARINGS ON PROPERTY TAX VALUATIONS.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record, as Clerk of Council, shall
annually request that the Board of Revision of Richland County, Ohio, furnish
him or her with notice of any and all hearings to be held on complaints and
requests for reduction as to the valuation of any property in the city.
(Ord. 66-99, passed 1-3-2000)
§ 220.05  DETERMINATION OF A JUST AMOUNT FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (a)   Prior to the enactment of a resolution of necessity required by
Charter §
78, the Council shall make a determination pursuant to Charter §
89 as to the city's part of the cost and expense of the improvement for which
special assessments are levied as the Council deems just.  In making this
determination, the Council may consider a number of factors, including but not
limited to project design in excess of minimum requirements, unusual
topography, the costs of individual septic systems and/or wells, the potential
for development of the lands to be benefitted by the public improvement, the
revenue sources to pay the city's share, and census data regarding household
income.
   (b)   Council recognizes that each project involving special assessments is
unique.  Therefore, no determination made in accordance with division (a) above
shall constitute a precedent.
(Ord. 12-2001, passed 4-2-2001)
§ 220.06  ESTABLISHING CHARGES FOR THE PRIVILEGE OF CONNECTING TO SANITARY
SEWER LINES AND WATER LINES FOR ALL PROPERTIES NOT PREVIOUSLY ASSESSED FOR THE
SAME.
   (a)   No property shall be connected either directly or indirectly to any
sanitary sewer line or water line owned by the city unless the connection is
made in conformity with the provisions of this section and such other rules and
regulations as may be from time to time established by Council, by the Director
of Public Service, or by any other authority which may lawfully exercise
control over the lines and unless the owner of the property shall have paid the
applicable connection charge prescribed by this section which shall be in
addition to any other fees and charges which may be required with respect to
the connection by the rules and regulations.  In the event that the Director of
Public Service shall ascertain that any property has been connected either
directly or indirectly to any sanitary sewer line or water line in violation of
the provisions of this section or such rules and regulations, the Director is
hereby authorized to disconnect the property from the line until the violation
shall cease.
   (b)   The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land
desiring to connect to any sanitary sewer line or water line, hereinafter
referred to as the "applicant" shall not connect to any such line unless the
applicant shall have first secured a permit from the Director of Public
Service.
   (c)   The Director of Public Service shall not issue the permit described in
division (b) of this section unless, in addition to all fees and charges which
may be required for connection to a sanitary sewer line or water line by any
other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of this city, the applicant
shall have first paid to the Director of Finance and Public Record a connection
charge in an amount determined by the city.
   (d)   The city, in determining the charge to be levied under division (c) of
this section, shall determine from the records relating to the construction of
the sanitary sewer line or water line to which connection is sought and
particularly from any resolution of necessity to assess adopted by Council as
part of the construction process, the amount of the special assessment that
would have been levied upon the property now seeking connection had it been
determined that the property was benefitted at the time of construction.  The
determination shall be made without regard to the actions of the Board of
Revision of Assessments.  The city shall then add to this amount an additional
sum equal to the interest on a proportionate share any notes or bonds that were
issued by the city to pay the costs of construction and incidental expenses
arising out of the construction of the line for each year that the notes or
bonds were outstanding.  This amount shall be deemed to be the connection
charge required under division (c) of this section, which charge must be paid
before the connection is permitted.
   (e)   The permit fee and the connection charge specified herein shall not
preclude any deposit or bond required by any other ordinance to ensure that the
connection with the sanitary sewer line or water line shall be made in such a
manner as will not injure the line and will ensure that all streets, sidewalks
and other property will be returned to the same state as before the connection
was made.
   (f)   Any person who attempts to or does connect property to a sanitary
sewer line or a water line as defined herein or a connection with such a line,
without securing the permit required by this section, is hereby determined to
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  Each 24-hour period a connection in
violation of this section remains connected to a sanitary sewer line or water
line, or a connection to that line, shall be deemed to be a separate violation
of this section.
   (g)   Any fees which are received for connecting with the sanitary sewer
lines or water lines which have been constructed from the proceeds of an issue
of notes or bonds of the city, which notes or bonds are general obligations of
the city, shall be delivered to the Director of Finance and Public Record who
shall thereupon credit the amount thereof the Special Bond Retirement Fund,
provided, however, that any fees received for connecting with a sanitary sewer
line or a water line constructed by bonds secured by a pledge of revenues or a
mortgage on real property or for which the notes or bonds have already been
paid, shall be credited to the Sewer Fund or the Water Fund, as the case may
be.
(Ord. 12-2001, passed 4-2-2001)  Penalty, see §
202.99
CHAPTER 222:  ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
   
222.01   Assignment of numbers for codification
   
222.02   Application to city property beyond city limits
Cross-reference:
   Charter amendments, see Charter §
123
   Emergency measures, see Charter §
21
   Fee for photocopying; certified copies, see §
204.04
   Initiative, see Charter §§
67 et seq.
   Introduction and passage, see Charter §§
11,
12
   Record and publication, see Charter §
17
   Referendum, see Charter §§
72 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes, see R.C. § 731.231
   As evidence, see R.C. § 731.42
   Publication in book form, see R.C. § 731.23
§ 222.01  ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS FOR CODIFICATION.
   (a)   The Director of Finance and Public Record, after duly recording each
ordinance and resolution of a general and permanent nature passed by Council,
shall forthwith present the ordinance or resolution to the Director of Law, who
shall assign to the ordinance or resolution the proper section number of the
Codified Ordinances of the city.
   (b)   The Director of Law, upon receiving an ordinance or resolution from
the Director of Finance and Public Record, shall, within five days thereafter,
assign to the ordinance or resolution, and each section thereof, a Codified
Ordinances number and return the same to the Director of Finance and Public
Record.
   (c)   After the assignment of section numbers of the Codified Ordinances, as
provided in divisions (a) and (b) hereof, the ordinance or resolution, and
sections thereof, shall be known and referred to as such section of the
Codified Ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 11, passed 12-11-1922)
§ 222.02  APPLICATION TO CITY PROPERTY BEYOND CITY LIMITS.
   All ordinances and resolutions which have been or are hereafter passed by
Council shall apply to all property owned by the city beyond the corporate
limits, to the fullest extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 1-2016, passed 2-1-2016)
CHAPTER 224:  INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
   
224.01   Introduction
   
224.02   Scope
   
224.03   Objectives
   
224.04   Prudence
   
224.05   Authorized dealers and financial institutions
   
224.06   Authorized investments
   
224.07   Maximum maturities
   
224.08   Safekeeping and custody
   
224.09   Prohibited investment practices
   
224.10   Internal controls
   
224.11   Records and reporting
   
224.12   Education
   
224.13   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
224.14   Nonbinding arbitration
   
224.15   Investment policy review and revision
§ 224.01  INTRODUCTION.
   It is the policy of the City of Shelby, Ohio, to invest public funds in a
manner that will provide the highest investment return with maximum security,
safety, and preservation of principal while meeting the daily cash flow needs
of the city and conforming to applicable laws governing the investment of
public funds by an Ohio municipality. The Director of Finance and Public Record
is the investment officer for the city, charged with the responsibility for the
purchase and sale of investments and the implementation of and compliance with
this investment policy.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.02  SCOPE.
   This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city,
including state and federal funds held by it, other than funds held and
invested pursuant to the express terms of a trust agreement. The Director of
Finance and Public Record shall routinely monitor the contents of the city’s
investment portfolio, the available markets and relative value of competing
investments and shall adjust the portfolio accordingly.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.03  OBJECTIVES.
   The primary objectives, in priority order, of the city’s investment
activities shall be:
   (a)   Safety.  Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program.  City investments should be undertaken in a manner that
seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio.  To
attain this objective, diversification is required in order that potential
losses on individual securities do not exceed the income generated from the
remainder of the portfolio.
   (b)   Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio should remain sufficiently
liquid to enable it to meet all operating requirements that might be reasonably
anticipated.
   (c)   Return on investment.  The city’s investment portfolio should be
designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout
budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account this investment policy and
the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.04  PRUDENCE.
   (a)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care under circumstances
then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (b)   The standard of prudence to be used by the Director of Finance and
Public Record shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in
the context of managing the overall portfolio.  Acting in accordance with this
investment policy and exercising due diligence shall relieve the Director of
Finance and Public Record of personal responsibility for an individual
security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from
expectations are reported to the Council in a timely fashion and appropriate
action is to take control adverse developments.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.05  AUTHORIZED DEALERS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
   (a)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall maintain a list of
financial institutions and approved securities broker/dealers, selected on the
basis of creditworthiness, who are authorized to provide investment services
and who qualify under R.C. § 135.14(M)(1). These may include “primary” dealers
or regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission Rule
15c3-1 and are registered with the Ohio Department of Commerce to do business
in the state.
   (b)   All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become
qualified suppliers of investment transactions to the city must provide to the
Director of Finance and Public Record:
      (1)   Audited annual financial statements;
      (2)   Proof of good standing with the Comptroller of Currency or with
state banking regulators or Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
certification;
      (3)   Proof of Ohio registration; and
      (4)   Biographical and regulatory information on the persons who are the
primary contact with the city. 
   (c)   All financial institutions, broker/dealers, and other entities who
desire to conduct investment business (advice, recommendations, or
transactions) with the city must sign this investment policy, acknowledging
that they have read it, understand it, and, in the case of those initiating
transactions, agree to abide by its contents.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.06  AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS.
   The city is authorized by statute to invest in the following types of
securities and investments.
   (a)   United States Treasury bills, notes, bonds, or any other obligation or
security issued by the United States Treasury or any other obligation
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States (not including
“stripped” principal or interest obligations).
   (b)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other obligations or securities issued by
any federal government agency or instrumentality, including but not limited to
the Federal National Mortgage Association, Federal Home Loan Bank, Federal Farm
Credit Bank, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, Government National
Mortgage Association and Student Loan Marketing Association.  All such
securities must be direct issuances of federal government agencies or
instrumentalities and may not be stripped principal or interest obligations.
   (c)   Interim deposits in duly authorized depositories of the city, provided
those deposits are properly insured or collateralized as required by law.
   (d)   Bonds and other obligations of the State of Ohio.
   (e)   No-load money market mutual funds consisting exclusively of securities
described in divisions (a) and (b) of this section and repurchased agreements
secured by such obligations, provided all such investments under this division
(e) shall be made with a bank, domestic association or savings bank eligible to
be a depository for public funds of Ohio subdivisions and provided further that
any such funds meets the requirements of R.C. Chapter 135 (including that such
fund not include any investment in a “derivative”).
   (f)   Ohio Subdivision’s Fund (STAROhio).
   (g)   Overnight or term (not exceeding 30 days) repurchase agreements
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 135.14(E) with:
      (1)   A bank, domestic association, or savings bank eligible to be a
depository of public funds of Ohio subdivisions or
      (2)   A member of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.07  MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its investments with
anticipated cash flow requirements.  No investment shall be made unless the
Director of Finance and Public Record, at the time of making the investment,
reasonably expects it can be held to its maturity. Unless matched to a specific
obligation or debt of the city, the city will not directly invest in securities
listed in divisions (a) through (e) above under §
224.06 maturing more than five years from the date of settlement if such
securities bear interest at a fixed rate, and it will not directly invest in
such securities maturing more than two years from the date of settlement if
they bear interest at a variable rate.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.08  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All securities transactions, including securities acquired subject to
repurchase agreements, entered into by the city will be conducted on a
delivery-versus-payment basis.  Purchased securities shall be held on behalf of
the city by a custodian, designated by the Director of Finance and Public
Record, that is a Federal Reserve Bank or other “qualified trustee” within the
meaning of R.C. § 135.18(I), and the safekeeping of those securities for the
benefit of the city shall be evidenced by safekeeping receipts. Purchased
securities may be released by the city only upon verification that their
principal and interest, or proceeds of their sale, have been credited to the
city’s account.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.09  PROHIBITED INVESTMENT PRACTICES.
   In addition to any other prohibitions in the Revised Code, the city will not
take any of the following actions.
   (a)   Contract to sell securities that have not yet been acquired on the
speculation that prices will decline.
   (b)   Make any investment in “derivatives” as defined in R.C. § 135.14(C).
   (c)   Invest in a fund established by another public body for the purpose of
investing public money of other subdivisions except either:
      (1)   STAROhio; or
      (2)   A fund created solely from the purpose of acquiring, constructing,
owning, leasing, or operating municipal utilities as authorized under R.C. §
715.02 or Section 4 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution.
   (d)   Enter into reverse repurchase agreements.
   (e)   Leverage current investments as collateral to purchase other assets.
   (f)   Invest in stripped principal or interest obligations of otherwise
eligible obligations.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.10  INTERNAL CONTROLS.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall develop and maintain
procedures for the operation of the city’s investment program in accordance
with this investment policy. These procedures shall be designed to prevent loss
of the city’s funds due to fraud, error, misrepresentation, unanticipated
market changes, or imprudent actions.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.11  RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   (a)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall maintain a current
inventory of all investments including:
      (1)   Description of each security;
      (2)   Cost;
      (3)   Par value;
      (4)   Dates (beginning, settlement and maturity);
      (5)   Rates; and
      (6)   Seller.
   (b)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall also prepare and
distribute to Council on or about June 15 and December 15 of each year (or more
frequently if requested by the Council) a list of all investments and a report
on investment activity and returns.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.12  EDUCATION.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall, and is authorized to,
participate in any beginning and/or continuing education training programs
sponsored by the State Treasurer or the State Auditor in which the Director of
Finance and Public Record is required to participate pursuant to R.C. §§ 117.44
and 135.22. Through participation in those programs, the Director of Finance
and Public Record will develop and maintain an enhanced background and working
knowledge in investment, cash management, and ethics.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.13  ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Persons involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment
program or that could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions. Employees and investment consultants shall disclose to the city any
material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business
within the city and any large personal financial or investment positions that
could be related to or affected by the performance of the city's portfolio. All
employees, officers, and investment consultants to the city shall subordinate
their personal investment transactions to those of the city, particularly with
regard to the timing of purchases and sales. The above supplements the
applicable provisions of the Ohio ethics law.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.14  NONBINDING ARBITRATION.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record may enter into a written
investment or deposit agreement that includes a provision under which the
parties agree to submit to nonbinding arbitration (but not binding arbitration)
to settle any controversy that may arise out of that agreement so long as such
provision meets the requirements of the Revised Code and is specifically
approved by the Council.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 224.15  INVESTMENT POLICY REVIEW AND REVISION.
   This investment policy is to be adopted by the Council. This policy is to be
reviewed on an annual basis in January of each year by the Council or a
committee designated by it.  Any modifications of this policy must be approved
by the Council. This investment policy and any modifications thereof, may, but
need not be, filed with any state office or agency.
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-18-2016)
TITLE SIX - ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
230.   MAYOR
         
232.   DIRECTOR OF LAW
         
234.   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND PUBLIC RECORD
         
236.   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
         
238.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
240.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
242.   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE
         
244.   DIVISION OF STREETS
         
246.   PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICERS
         
248.   DIVISION OF ELECTRICITY AND COMMUNICATIONS
         
250.   DIVISION OF WATER
         
252.   DIVISION OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND SEWERS
         
258.   ELECTED OFFICIALS' SALARIES
         
260.   EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
CHAPTER 230:  MAYOR
Section
   
230.01   Equal employment program
   
230.02   Emergency powers
   
230.03   Annual report to Council
   
230.04   Reserved
   
230.05   Seal of the Mayor
   
230.06   Community and Economic Development Coordinator
   
230.07   Project Coordinator
 
   
230.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of officers and employees, see Charter §
27
   Approval of bonds, see Charter §§
18,
117
   Approval of legislation, see Charter §
12
   Authority re contracts, see §§
236.02,
242.06
   Bond, see §
260.01
   Duties generally, see Charter §
29
   Elected officials' salaries, see
Ch. 258
   Election and term, see Charter §§
3,
24
   Ex officio Director of Public Safety, see Charter §§
27,
28
   Ex officio Director of Public Service, see Charter §§
27,
28
   Executive and administrative powers, see Charter §§
23,
24
   Oath of office, see Charter §
120
   President of Council, see Charter §
27
   Removal, see Charter §§
57 et seq.
   Vacancy, see Charter §
26
§ 230.01  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT PROGRAM.
   The Mayor, as Director of Public Safety and Service, shall establish and
maintain a program of employment opportunity to ensure that the merit principle
processes are free from artificial barriers to employment and promotion.
(1996 Code, § 230.02)  (Res. 38-84, passed 8-6-1984)
§ 230.02  EMERGENCY POWERS.
   (a)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to be able to declare a
state of emergency whenever a critical condition exists, whether caused by an
act of God, a natural occurrence or a man-made disaster or occurrence, in which
the Mayor determines it necessary to preserve the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the city.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, a "state of emergency" shall be
defined as follows: any sudden unexpected happening, an unforeseen occurrence
or condition, or a specifically perplexing contingency or complication of
circumstances, creating an insufficiency of service or facilities which may
result in social disturbance or distress.
   (c)   During any state of emergency decided by the Mayor, the Mayor, as
Director of Public Service, is hereby authorized to order curtailment and/or
abatement, by any and all industries, homeowners and/or residents of the city,
of use of water and/or electricity as determined by the Mayor.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service shall immediately, upon declaring an
emergency, cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city and shall make the same known to the general public by either
radio or television.
   (e)   Council, by a three-fourths majority vote at a regular or special
meeting, may override the Mayor's determination of a state of emergency.
(1996 Code, § 230.03)  (Ord. 36-78,  passed 10-16-1978)  Penalty, see §
230.99
§ 230.03  ANNUAL REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   At the first regular meeting in February of each year and at such other
times as the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the Council
concerning the affairs of the municipal corporation and recommend such measures
as seem proper.
(Ord. 46-2009, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 230.04  RESERVED.
§ 230.05  SEAL OF THE MAYOR.
   In accordance with R.C. § 5.10, the seal of the Office of Mayor shall
consist of the coat of arms of the state within a circle one and one-fourth
inches in diameter and shall be surrounded by the words “MAYOR OF THE CITY OF
SHELBY, OHIO.” Said seal shall be the official seal of the city.
(Ord. 21-2010, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 230.06  COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COORDINATOR.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a Community and Economic
Development Coordinator. Said coordinator shall perform consultative and
technical work in the planning, development, and implementation of the city's
community development and economic development programs and shall perform such
other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor or by ordinance. Said coordinator
shall be in the unclassified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 24-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 230.07  PROJECT COORDINATOR.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a Project Coordinator.  Said
coordinator shall prepare documents and administer all public works projects
and undertakings of the city, shall serve as the city’s representative to the
Richland County GIS Consortium and as the city’s prevailing wage coordinator,
and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor or by
ordinance.  Said coordinator shall be in the unclassified service in accordance
with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 8-2016, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 230.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any ordered curtailment of electrical power and/or
water, as declared in a state of emergency, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, the city
may terminate and/or disconnect service to residents and/or businesses who or
which commit the violation.
(Ord. 36-78, passed 10-16-1978)
CHAPTER 232:  DIRECTOR OF LAW
Section
   
232.01   Legal Secretary
   
232.02   Signature of the Director required
   
232.03   Assistant Director of Law
Cross-reference:
   Application for appropriation of real property, see Charter §
110
   Application for assessment of damage claims, see Charter §
84
   Certification of referendum petition, see Charter §
72
   Duties as to initiated legislation, see Charter §§
68,
69
   Elected officials' salaries, see
Ch. 258
   Election and term, see Charter §§
3,
31
   Executive and administrative powers, see Charter §
23
   Member of Board of Revision of Assessments, see Charter §
81
   Oath of office, see Charter §
120
   Qualifications and duties, see Charter §§
31 et seq.
   Removal, see Charter §§
57 et seq.
   Vacancy, see Charter §
30
§ 232.01  LEGAL SECRETARY.
   The position of Legal Secretary is hereby established. The person appointed
to this position shall not be paid for more than 20 hours per week. The
position shall be considered to be part-time, and the person appointed to it
shall not be eligible for fringe benefits provided in
Chapter 260, unless otherwise expressly provided by Council.
(Ord. 36-70, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 232.02  SIGNATURE OF THE DIRECTOR REQUIRED.
   No contract, bond or other instrument in writing in which the city is
concerned and upon which §
31 of the City Charter requires the endorsement of the Director of Law's
approval of the form and correctness thereof shall be effective unless it
contains the genuine signature of the Director.
(Ord. 15-2003, passed 5-19-2003)
§ 232.03  ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   (a)   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to appoint an Assistant
Director of Law who shall perform such duties as directed by the Director of
Law.
   (b)   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to negotiate and enter into a
contract for the services of an Assistant Director of Law on such terms as may
be equitable and advisable, subject to the approval of Council.
(Ord. 23-2005, passed 7-18-2005)
CHAPTER 234:  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND PUBLIC RECORD
Section
   
234.01   Depository for public moneys
   
234.02   Treasury investment account
   
234.03   Miscellaneous moneys; Police Equipment Fund
   
234.04   Law Enforcement Trust Fund
   
234.05   Streets-Sales Tax Account
   
234.06   Sale of personal property to city employees
   
234.07   Deposit of interest
   
234.08   Transfer of funds
   
234.09   Insurance Administrator
   
234.10   Deputy Director of Finance and Public Record
Cross-reference:
   Bidding and contracts, see §§
236.02,
242.06
   Certification of contracts, see Charter §
46
   Clerical duties, see Charter §
38
   Deposit of public moneys, see Charter §§
20,
43,
44
   Director as Clerk of Council, see Charter §
10
   Duties as chief accounting officer, see Charter §§
40,
41
   Duties as City Treasurer, see Charter §§
20,
43 et seq.
   Duties as to improvement assessments, see Charter §§
78 et seq.
   Duties generally, see Charter §§
37,
38
   Elected officials' salaries, see
Ch. 258
   Election and term, see Charter §§
3,
36
   Executive and administrative powers, see Charter §
23
   Notification for water and sewer connections, see Charter §
93
   Notification of proposed Charter amendments, see Charter §
123
   Payment of claims, see Charter §
42
   Recall, see Charter §§
57 et seq.
   Secretary of Trustees of the Sinking Fund, see Charter §
51
   Vacancy, see Charter §
30
§ 234.01  DEPOSITORY FOR PUBLIC MONEYS.
   In determining depositories for public moneys, the Director of Finance and
Public Record shall in all ways comply with R.C. Chapter 135, the "Uniform
Depository Act".
(Ord. 51-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 234.02  TREASURY INVESTMENT ACCOUNT.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby established within and for the city a
Treasury Investment Account as provided by R.C. § 731.58, of which account the
Director of Finance and Public Record shall be custodian, and the treasury
investment trustees shall be the Director of Finance and Public Record, the
Mayor and the Director of Law.
   (b)   Safety deposit box. The Director of Finance and Public Record shall
rent a safety deposit box in one of the banks of the city and all the
securities of the Treasury Investment Account shall be kept therein. The rent
for the safety deposit box, as well as the premium on the bonds of the
trustees, shall be paid from the General Fund of the city.
   (c)   Bond for Trustees. The trustees of the Treasury Investment Account
above named shall each be required to give a bond, in addition to any other
bond they may be required to give to the city, in the sum of $5,000 to cover
the faithful performance of their duties as such trustees.
   (d)   Compliance with the Ohio Revised Code. All provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code requiring the establishment of a Treasury Investment Account shall
be strictly complied with.
(Ord. 424, passed 3-1-1937)
§ 234.03  MISCELLANEOUS MONEYS; POLICE EQUIPMENT FUND.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized and directed
to deposit into the Police Equipment Fund all other miscellaneous income and
miscellaneous moneys received by the Police Department.
(Res. 7-71, passed 4-5-1971; Ord. 34-2002, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 234.04  LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   There is hereby established within and for the city a Law Enforcement Trust
Fund, as provided by R.C. § 2933.43(D), and the Fund shall be administered in
accordance with that section.
(Ord. 36-87, passed 12-7-1987)
Statutory reference:
   The statute cited in this section has been repealed. Law enforcement trust
funds are now authorized by R.C. § 2981.13.
§ 234.05  STREETS-SALES TAX ACCOUNT.
   There is hereby established within and for the city a Streets-Sales Tax
Account, which the Director of Finance and Public Record shall administer in
accordance with the Sales Tax Sharing Agreement between the Board of County
Commissioners for Richland County, Ohio, and the city.
(Ord. 16-88, passed 5-16-1988)
§ 234.06  SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TO CITY EMPLOYEES.
   There shall be no private sale to city employees of personal property not
needed for municipal purposes, except that, upon retirement, the Chief of
Police may purchase his or her duty weapon for $1.  If the estimated value of
the property exceeds $1,000, the sale shall be in accordance with the
provisions of R.C. § 721.15.
(Ord. 16-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 234.07  DEPOSIT OF INTEREST.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall deposit interest into the
fund from which the interest was earned, with the following exceptions:
   (a)   General account investment interest and special bond retirement
investment interest shall be deposited into the General Fund.
   (b)   General checking account interest shall be deposited into the General
Fund.
   (c)   Sinking Fund checking account interest shall be deposited into the
Special Bond Retirement Fund and then transferred to the General Fund annually.
   (d)   Interest from customer deposit checking accounts shall be transferred
to the Electric Fund annually.
(Ord. 10-99, passed 3-15-1999)
§ 234.08  TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   (a)   The Director of Finance is authorized and directed to transfer 5% of
the funds received into the General Fund generated by the collection of the
kilowatt hour distribution tax on the distribution of kilowatt electricity to
end users located within the municipal corporate boundaries in accordance with
the provisions of R.C. §§ 5727.80 et seq. to the Electric Enterprise Fund,
pursuant to the authority found in R.C. Chapter 5705.
   (b)   The policy established by this section is in recognition of the
uncompensated local contributions and services provided by the municipal
electric utility to the community and to allow the utility to achieve as much
local revenue neutrality for consumers as possible after the imposition of the
new tax.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
§ 234.09  INSURANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall administer the city’s
insurance plans and policies, including but not limited to health insurance,
Worker’s Compensation, life insurance, property and casualty coverage, and
liability insurance, subject to the oversight of Council.
(Ord. 2-2016, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 234.10  DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND PUBLIC RECORD.
   The position of Deputy Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby
established. Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Finance and
Public Record, said Deputy Director shall exercise the powers and perform the
duties as have been delegated upon the Director of Finance and Public Record by
the Charter and Codified Ordinances of the city and by the laws of the state as
applicable to the positions of City Auditor and City Treasurer.  Said Deputy
Director shall be in the unclassified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11
(A)(28).
(Ord. 7-2016, passed 4-4-2016)
CHAPTER 236:  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
   
236.01   Cooperative purchasing
   
236.02   Lowest and best prime bidder
   
236.03   Signature of the Director required
   
236.04   Contracts, materials and labor
   
236.05   Chaplains for the Police and Fire Departments
   
236.06   Insurance proceeds from fire-damaged structures
   
236.07   Honorary positions
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of Health Commissioner, see Charter §
50
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 240
   Mayor as ex officio Director of Public Safety, see Charter §
28
   Police Department, see
Ch. 238
Statutory reference:
   Fire Department, see R.C. §§ 737.08 et seq.
   General duties and records, see R.C. §§ 737.02 et seq.
   Police Department, see R.C. §§ 737.05 et seq.
§ 236.01  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   (a)   The Mayor, as Director of Public Safety, is hereby authorized to
request, in the name of the city, participation in state contracts which the
Department of Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, has entered
into for the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and certain materials,
pursuant to R.C. § 125.04.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to agree, in the
name of the city, to be bound by all contract terms and conditions prescribed
by the Department of Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing.  Such
terms and conditions may include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative
costs which the Department incurs as a result of the city's participation in a
contract. Further, the Director of Public Safety does hereby agree to be bound
by all such terms and agreements.
   (c)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to agree, in the
name of the city, to pay the vendor directly, under each such state contract in
which it participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract, and the
Director does hereby agree to pay the vendor directly.
(Ord. 16-86, passed 7-7-1986)
§ 236.02  LOWEST AND BEST PRIME BIDDER.
   (a)   In determining the lowest and best prime bidder, the Mayor as Director
of Public Safety may consider a number of factors including, but not limited
to, price, warranty, past performance on previous contracts, product
reliability, delivery date, and adherence to specifications In all contracts
over $25,000, a local bidder shall receive a credit equal to 1.5% of the lowest
bid where the lowest bidder is a non-local bidder. The maximum credit allowance
shall not exceed $10,000.
   (b)   A “local bidder” is defined as a person or unincorporated business
entity, domiciled within the city, or if a corporation, as listed in its
Articles of Incorporation filed with the Secretary of State, its principal
place of business address of the corporation within the city.
(Ord. 2-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 44-2010, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 236.03  SIGNATURE OF THE DIRECTOR REQUIRED.
   (a)   No contract, agreement, grant application, or other document requiring
the signature of the Director of Public Safety shall be effective unless it
contains the genuine signature of the Mayor or Acting Mayor as ex officio
Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety shall include this section in all bid
packages of the Department of Public Safety and make its provisions known to
supervisors within that Department.
(Ord. 9-2003, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 236.04  CONTRACTS, MATERIALS AND LABOR.
   The Mayor, as ex officio Director of Public Safety, may make all contracts
and expenditures of money under $25,000 for acquiring lands for the erection or
repairing of station houses, police stations, Fire Department buildings, fire
cisterns and plugs, that are required, for the purchase of engines, apparatus
and all other supplies necessary for the Police and Fire Departments, and for
other undertakings and departments under the Director’s supervision. No
obligation involving an expenditure of more than $25,000 but less than $50,000
shall be created unless first authorized and directed by ordinance or
resolution of the city legislative authority. In making, altering or modifying
contracts over $50,000, the Director shall be governed by R.C. §§ 735.05 to
735.09, except that all bids shall be filed with and opened by the Director of
Public Safety. The Director shall make no sale or disposition of any property
belonging to the city without first being authorized by resolution or ordinance
of the city legislative authority.
(Ord. 19-2003, passed 6-2-2003; Ord. 55-2005, passed 12-12-2005; Ord. 24-2015,
passed 8-3-2015)
§ 236.05  CHAPLAINS FOR THE POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   (a)   The Mayor, as Director of Public Safety, is hereby authorized and
directed to appoint up to three persons, who by their education and experience,
are qualified to serve as chaplains for the Police and Fire Departments. The
chaplains shall represent the religious diversity of the community.
   (b)   The annual salary for each chaplain shall be $1 per year.
   (c)   Chaplains shall be considered as official members of both the Police
and Fire Departments but shall have authority only in their particular field.
They shall not have the power of arrest or any other official power granted to
sworn members of both departments, nor shall they have any authority with
regard to fire and police operations. Chaplains shall be in the unclassified
service.
   (d)   Chaplains shall be responsible to the Director of Public Safety and to
the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief in whatever department they perform their
duties.
   (e)   Chaplains shall have the official title of Chaplain. Each chaplain
shall be issued a chaplain's badge and a city identification card.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to purchase a dress
uniform for each chaplain, such uniform to consist of a dress blouse, dress
trousers, white uniform shirt, cap and insignias. Fire boots may also be
purchased for each chaplain.
   (g)   The city shall pay for a membership for each chaplain either to the
International Conference of Police Chaplains or to the Federation of Fire
Chaplains.
(Ord. 22-2005, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 236.06  INSURANCE PROCEEDS FROM FIRE-DAMAGED STRUCTURES.
   (a)   The city is hereby authorized to utilize the procedure described in
Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D), whereby no insurance company doing business in
the State of Ohio shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
structure situated within the city, where the amount recoverable for the fire
loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $5,000, unless there is
compliance with the following procedures:
      (1)   When the loss agreed to between the named insured or insureds and
the company or companies equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
insurance company or companies, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 715.26(F), shall
transfer from the insurance proceeds to the Director of Public Safety in the
aggregate $1,000 for each $20,000, and each fraction of that amount of the
claim; or if, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured or insureds and the insurance company or companies, the named insured
or insureds have submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing, or securing the building or other structure, the company
or companies shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in
the estimate.
         Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining
after the transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy
terms.
         The named insured or insureds may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing, or securing the building or other
structure after the transfer, and the Director of Public Safety shall return
the amount of the funds in excess of the estimate to the named insured or
insureds, provided that the city has not commenced to remove, repair, or secure
the building or other structure.
      (2)   Upon receipt of proceeds by the city as authorized by this section,
the Director of Public Safety shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be
used solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing, or
securing incurred by the city pursuant to Ohio R.C. 715.261.
         When transferring the funds as required in this subsection, an
insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address of the named
insured or insureds, whereupon the city shall contact the named insured or
insureds, certify that the proceeds have been received by the city, and notify
them that the following procedure will be followed:
         The funds shall be returned to the named insured or insureds when
repair, removal, or securing of the building or other structure has been
completed and the required proof has been received by the Director of Public
Safety. If the city has incurred any costs for such repair, removal, or
securing of the building or other structure, such costs shall be paid from the
fund and, if excess funds remain, the city shall transfer the remaining funds
to the named insured or insureds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
limit the ability of the city to recover any deficiency under Ohio R.C.
715.261.
         Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city and
the named insured or insureds from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured or insureds if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
      (3)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby designated as the officer
authorized and directed to carry out the duties of this section. The Director
of Public Safety shall file a certified copy of this section with the
Superintendent of Insurance of the State of Ohio.
   (b)   The Director of Finance and Public Record, as authorized by Ohio R.C.
5705.09(F), shall establish a fund for the purpose of receiving and disbursing
monies in accordance with the procedures specified in this section.
   (c)   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized and
directed to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the receipt and
expenditure of monies received by the city for the purposes specified in this
section. No expenditure of monies from the fund authorized by this section
shall be made except in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Director of Finance and Public Record.
(Ord. 13-2013, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 236.07  HONORARY POSITIONS.
   The Mayor, as Director of Public Safety, is hereby authorized to recognize
civilians who have rendered significant service to either the Police Department
or the Fire Department by naming them to honorary positions within said
department.  Persons named to honorary positions are neither officers nor
employees of the city and may be removed from their positions without cause.
(Ord. 14-2014, passed 7-21-2014)
CHAPTER 238:  POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
238.01   Establishment; membership
   
238.02   Authority of Chief and Mayor
   
238.03   Original appointments; age limitations
   
238.04   Auxiliary Police Unit
   
238.05   Nonresident service
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of police officers employed by another jurisdiction, see
Charter § 52
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
608.16
Statutory reference:
   Assistance of State Criminal Bureau, see R.C. §§ 109.51 et seq.
   Auxiliary Police Unit, see R.C. §§ 737.051, 737.06
   Civil service contracts, see R.C. §§ 124.43, 737.051, 737.10, 737.11
   Composition and control, see R.C. §§ 715.05, 737.05
   Forwarding fingerprints and other data to State Criminal Bureau, see R.C. §§
109.58 et seq.
   Original appointment; probationary period and age, see R.C. §§ 124.27,
124.30, 124.41
   Peace officer training certificate required to permanent employment, see
R.C. § 109.77
   Police Chief, see R.C. § 737.06
   Police Chief suspension, see R.C. §§ 124.34, 124.40
   Police protection application; intergovernmental agreements, see R.C. §§
505.443, 737.04
   Promotions, see R.C. §§ 124.31, 124.44
   Reductions, suspensions and removals, see R.C. §§ 124.34 et seq., § 737.12
   Sick leave, see R.C. § 124.38
§ 238.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Police Department for the city, to
consist of the following officers and personnel and such other officers and
personnel as Council shall from time to time determine:
      (1)   One Chief of Police;
      (2)   Two police captains;
      (3)   Three police sergeants;
      (4)   Eleven police patrol officers, two of which shall be school
resource officers. The hiring and continued employment of said resource
officers shall be contingent upon active contracts in partnership with the
Board of Education of the Shelby City School District and the Board of
Education of the Pioneer Career & Technology Center, wherein each board will
immediately pay or reimburse the city 75% of all cost, expense, pension,
retirement, health benefit, insurance, or any other cost or expense associated
with said school resource officer as well as a proportional share of all
training cost or expense associated with said school resource officer. If a
board fails for any reason whatsoever to pay or reimburse the city as
contemplated herein, the School Resource Officer's position for that district
shall be immediately terminated, unless otherwise modified by Council. 
Further, said positions are contingent upon any collective bargaining agreement
between the city and Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 180 acknowledging and
approving the terms contained herein as well as with any contract or agreement
with each board; and
      (5)   Four police dispatchers.
   (b)   The Police Department parking meter repair person shall no longer be a
position in the Police Department.
(Ord. 27-84,  passed 8-29-1984; Ord. 9-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 26-2013,
passed 8-5-2013; Ord. 22-2017, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. 5-2018, passed 5-21-2018;
Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 238.02  AUTHORITY OF CHIEF AND MAYOR.
   The Chief of Police shall have control of the entire police force under the
orders and direction of the Mayor, and he or she shall be directly responsible
to the Mayor for his or her acts. It shall be the duty of the Chief and the
entire force to keep order in the city and see that all the ordinances and
penal laws of the state are properly enforced.
(1923 Code, § 16)
§ 238.03  ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS; AGE LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   No person is eligible to receive an original appointment to the Police
Department, as a policeman or policewoman, unless he or she has reached the age
of 21 years. No person is eligible to receive an original appointment when he
or she is 70 years of age or older, and no person can be declared disqualified
as over age prior to that time.
   (b)   These provisions shall not be construed to eliminate any other
requirements established by law for original appointments.
(Ord. 31-86, passed 11-3-1986)
§ 238.04  AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 737.051, an Auxiliary Police Unit is hereby
established within the Police Department.
   (b)   The Mayor, as Director of Public Safety, shall be the executive head
of the Auxiliary Police Unit and shall make all appointments and removals of
auxiliary police officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by Council
by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the organization, training,
administration, control and conduct of the Auxiliary Police Unit.
   (c)   Members of the Auxiliary Police Unit shall not be in the classified
service of the city.
   (d)   The maximum authorized personnel strength of the Auxiliary Police Unit
shall be 20 officers.
   (e)   Members of the Auxiliary Police Unit who have a current Ohio peace
officer certification and who have reached the age of 21 shall be paid the
wages of a probationary police officer, as established in the then current
collective bargaining agreement for their services, and non-certified officers
shall be paid at the then current hourly minimum wage rate as established by
the State of Ohio for their services, and the city shall furnish patches and
badges for the Auxiliary Police Unit.
   (f)   Members of the Auxiliary Police Unit shall possess the same
qualifications required of regular full-time police officers, except that the
training may be waived for such period of time as the appointing authority may
prescribe.
   (g)   Upon administration of a proper oath of office, each auxiliary police
officer shall:
      (1)   Remain on call, as an off-duty police officer, for augmentation of
the regular police force at such times and under such conditions as the
Director of Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police may, from time to time,
deem necessary and proper to provide for the preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of persons and their property;
      (2)   Report for active duty as required by the Chief of Police; and
      (3)   Shall not be assigned to enforcement of criminal laws (general
crowd and traffic control excepted) or wear or employ firearms in connection
with assigned duties until properly trained and qualified in accordance with
the laws and regulations made and provided for officers serving in the regular
police force.
   (h)   The limitations on assignment of auxiliary police officers under
division (g)(3) of this section shall not be construed as a limitation upon the
full police power conferred by the city upon all of its police officers, and a
violation of that division shall not constitute a defense against the city in
any proceedings to enforce criminal laws.
   (i)   Auxiliary police officers shall comply with and be subject to all
laws, rules and regulations provided for full-time police officers and to the
Auxiliary bylaws, except for those which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this section.
   (j)  The Chief of Police, with approval of the Mayor, may allow retirees to
maintain a commission with the Shelby Police Department, without counting
toward the authorized personnel strength of the Auxiliary Unit pursuant to
division (d), above.  Such officers will maintain police powers but may not be
called upon to act in a uniformed enforcement capacity within the Police
Department.  They may be called upon to perform other voluntary administrative
or community service duties, as requested and/or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 7-92, passed 3-16-1992; Ord. 7-97, passed 3-17-1997; Ord. 8-2002, passed
3-4-2002; Ord. 20-2002, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 17-2003, passed 4-7-2003; Ord.
24-2016, passed 10-3-2016)
§ 238.05  NONRESIDENT SERVICE.
   (a)   Council hereby approves the provision of police protection to any
city, village, county or township of the state or to a governmental entity of
an adjoining state, including complex investigation, critical response, rescue,
emergency and disaster situation assistance, whenever necessary and upon proper
authorization.
   (b)   Police protection and assistance shall be extended only upon
authorization of the Chief of Police, or the Assistant Chief on the exercise of
that officer's discretion, taking into account that such police protection or
other mutual aid may be extended only so far as is consistent with the proper
protection of the city, which shall have priority at all times for Police
Department personnel and equipment.
(Ord. 31-91, passed 12-16-1991)
CHAPTER 240:  FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
240.01   Establishment; membership; original appointments; age limitations
   
240.02   Nonresident service
   
240.03   Twenty-four-hour duty
   
240.04   Emergency medical service (EMS)
   
240.05   Underground storage tanks
   
240.06   Emergency medical service charges
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of police officers employed by another jurisdiction, see
Charter § 52
   Injuring or destroying fire apparatus, see §
642.13
   Parking near fire, see §
432.27
   Tampering with fire hydrants and reservoirs, see §
642.14
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of emergency firefighters, see R.C. § 737.10
   Civil Service application, see R.C. §§ 737.10, 737.11
   Composition and control, see R.C. §§ 715.05, 737.08, 737.21
   Fire Chief, see R.C. § 737.09
   Fire protection contracts, see R.C. §§ 307.05, 505.44, 717.02
   Gas masks for firefighters; requirements, see R.C. § 3737.72
   General duties, see R.C. § 737.11
   Hours and leave, see R.C. §§ 737.21, 4115.02
   Original appointments; probationary period and age, see R.C. §§ 124.27,
124.30, 124.42
   Police and Firefighters' Disability Fund and Pension, see R.C. Ch. 742
   Promotions, see R.C. §§ 124.31, 124.45 et seq.
   Reductions, suspensions and removals, see R.C. §§ 124.34 et seq., 737.12
   Sick leave, see R.C. § 124.38
§ 240.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS; AGE LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Fire Department for the city, to consist
of a Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as Council shall from
time to time determine.
   (b)   (1)   No person is eligible to receive an original appointment to the
Fire Department, as a firefighter, unless he or she has reached the age of 18
years. No person is eligible to receive an original appointment when he or she
is 70 years of age or older, and no person can be declared disqualified as over
age prior to that time.
      (2)   These provisions shall not be construed to eliminate any other
requirements established by law for original appointments.
   (c)   Personnel designated as full-time firefighters shall not exceed 12
fully trained persons.
   (d)   Personnel designated as volunteer part-time firefighters shall not
exceed 26 persons, and all shall be duly trained and qualified as required by
the laws of the state.
(Ord. 13-96, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 240.02  NONRESIDENT SERVICE.
   (a)   The Fire Department may, when practicable, respond to requests for
emergency fire fighting assistance from political subdivisions outside of the
corporate limits of the city and not serviced by fire contracts with the city.
   (b)   The authority to dispatch fire equipment and personnel for such
emergencies shall be vested in the Fire Chief and the Captains of the Fire
Department.
(Res. 18-68, passed 4-1-1968)
§ 240.03  TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR DUTY.
   The hours of labor for each force of four firefighters shall be 24
consecutive hours, except in cases of extraordinary emergency, in accordance
with R.C. § 4115.02. The 24 consecutive hours of labor shall commence at 7:00
a.m.
(Ord. 25-84, passed 8-6-1984)
§ 240.04  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS).
   The Fire Department is hereby authorized to respond to requests for
emergency medical service (EMS) within the corporate limits of the city and
Sharon and Jackson Townships. The Fire Department is only authorized to
transport person(s) in cases where the estimated time of arrival of the back-up
ambulance poses a significant threat to the life of the person(s) based on the
best information available to the personnel at the scene. Each decision to
transport will be followed within 24 hours by a signed report by the decision
maker stating the reasons for transport.
(Ord. 18-96, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3-2006, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 240.05  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.
   The Fire Department is hereby authorized to inspect, and issue written
permits for the installation of, the making of major repairs on site to, and
the abandonment and removal of, underground storage tanks, as that term is
defined in Division 1301:7-7-02 of the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.) and
R.C. § 3737.87, and to do so within the Fire Department's jurisdictional area.
(Ord. 20-97, passed 7-22-1997)
§ 240.06  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE CHARGES.
   The charges for Emergency Medical Services provided by the Fire Department
are hereby set as follows:
   (a)   $550.00 for Basic Life Support.
   (b)   $750.00 for Advanced Life Support.
   (c)   $950.00 for Advanced Life Support-2 (Cardiac).
   (d)   $14.00 per mile for patient transport.
(Ord. 10-2016, passed 5-16-2016)
CHAPTER 242:  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
   
242.01   Contracts, materials and labor
   
242.02   Deputy Director of Public Service
   
242.03   City Engineer
   
242.04   Superintendent of Streets
   
242.05   Cooperative purchasing
   
242.06   Lowest and best prime bidder
   
242.07   Signature of the Director required
Cross-reference:
   Mayor as ex officio Director of Public Service, see Charter §
28
Statutory reference:
   Appointment, see R.C. § 735.01
   Assistants, see R.C. § 735.04
   Contracts, see R.C. §§ 733.22 et seq., 735.05 et seq.
   General duties and records, see R.C. § 735.02
   Management and control of cemeteries, see R.C. §§ 759.09 et seq.
   Public building supervision, see R.C. §§ 735.10 et seq.
§ 242.01  CONTRACTS, MATERIALS AND LABOR.
   The Mayor, as ex officio Director of Public Service, may make any contract,
purchase supplies or materials, or provide labor for any work under the
supervision of the Department of Public Service involving not more than
$25,000. When an expenditure within the department, other than the compensation
of persons employed therein, exceeds $25,000 but less than $50,000, such
expenditures shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance or resolution
of City Council. When an expenditure within the department, other than
compensation of persons employed therein, exceeds $50,000, such expenditures
shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance or resolution. When so
authorized and directed, except where the contract is for equipment, services,
materials or supplies to be purchased under R.C. § 713.23(D) or  R.C. § 125.04
or § 5513.01 or available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§
4115.31 to 4115.35, the Director shall make a written contract with the lowest
and best bidder after advertisement for not less than two or more than four
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
(Ord. 15-89, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 20-2003, passed 6-2-2003; Ord. 54-2005,
passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 25-2015, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 242.02  DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to appoint a Deputy
Director of Public Service. In addition to performing the duties of Director of
Utilities, the Deputy Director shall manage and supervise all public works and
undertakings of the city, except as otherwise provided by law. The Deputy
Director shall exercise under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as
Director of Public Service the powers and perform the duties as have been
delegated upon the Director of Public Service by the laws of the state and by
the Charter and Codified Ordinances of the city. The Deputy Director shall be
in the unclassified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
(Ord. 33-2003, passed 9-2-2003)
§ 242.03  CITY ENGINEER.
   (a)   Appointment. The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to
appoint a City Engineer who shall be the City Supervisor of Engineering and who
shall be in the unclassified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
   (b)   Duties.  It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to do all of the
general engineering work of the city, such as engineering on the construction
of all improvements, the surveying and laying out thereof, the preparation of
all necessary plans, profiles and estimates, and the inspection of all public
work when directed to do so by the Director of Public Service.  Further, the
City Engineer shall provide professional engineering advice to any city
department and/or department supervisor in need of engineering advice and/or
counsel; prepare all documentation required for the securing of easements and/
or the application for grants; oversee public works projects; and perform any
and all other reasonable functions deemed to be necessary for the operation of
the city, whether explicitly listed above or prescribed by the Mayor as
Director of Public Service.
   (c)   Benefits.  The City Engineer, as City Supervisor of Engineering, shall
receive all benefits of employment as provided to all other full-time
supervisors of departments and/or department heads within the city.
(Ord. 2-95, passed 2-6-1995)
§ 242.04  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS.
   The Office of Superintendent of Streets shall consist of one person who
shall be known as the Superintendent of Streets, and such Superintendent shall
have charge of all operations at the Division of Streets, shall keep all
streets and storm water catch basins in good condition and in efficient and
continuous operation, and shall perform any and all other duties which are
necessary and incidental to such condition and operation under the supervision
and direction of the Mayor as Director of Public Service. The Superintendent
shall be licensed as required by the state.
(Ord. 65-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 242.05  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   (a)   The Mayor, as Director of Public Service, is hereby authorized to
request, in the name of the city, participation in state contracts which the
Department of Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, has entered
into for the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and certain materials,
pursuant to R.C. § 125.04.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to agree, in the
name of the city, to be bound by all contract terms and conditions prescribed
by the Department of Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing. Such
terms and conditions may include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative
costs which the Department incurs as a result of the city's participation in a
contract. Further, the Director of Public Service does hereby agree to be bound
by all such terms and agreements.
   (c)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to agree, in the
name of the city, to pay the vendor directly, under each such state contract in
which it participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract, and the
Director does hereby agree to pay the vendor directly.
(Ord. 17-86, passed 7-7-1986)
§ 242.06  LOWEST AND BEST PRIME BIDDER.
   (a)   In determining the lowest and best prime bidder, the Mayor as Director
of Public Service may consider a number of factors including, but not limited
to, price, warranty, past performance on previous contracts, product
reliability, delivery date, and adherence to specifications. In all contracts
over $25,000, a local bidder shall receive a credit equal to 1.5% of the lowest
bid where the lowest bidder is a non-local bidder The maximum credit allowance
shall not exceed $10,000.
   (b)   A “local bidder” is defined as a person or unincorporated business
entity, domiciled within the city, or if a corporation, as listed in its
Articles of Incorporation filed with the Secretary of State, its principal
place of business address of the corporation within the city.
(Ord. 3-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 45-2010, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 242.07  SIGNATURE OF THE DIRECTOR REQUIRED.
   (a)   No contract, agreement, grant application, or other document requiring
the signature of the Director of Public Service shall be effective unless it
contains the genuine signature of the Mayor or Acting Mayor as ex officio
Director of Public Service.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service shall include this section in all bid
packages of the Department of Public Service and make its provisions known to
supervisors within the Department.
(Ord. 7-2003, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 244:  DIVISION OF STREETS
Section
   
244.01   Establishment; membership
   
244.02   Duties
   
244.03   Civil service classification
Cross-reference:
   Alteration of streets, see Charter §
103
   Construction and improvement of streets, see
Ch. 1022
   Dedication of streets, see Charter §
104
   Sewer regulations, see
Ch. 1042
   Streets and public grounds, see Charter §
102
   Water and sewer connections, see Charter §
93
§ 244.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established within the Department of Public Service a
Division of Streets, to consist of the Superintendent of Streets and such other
employees as it is necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
(Ord. 68-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 244.02  DUTIES.
   The duties of the persons filling the positions established in §
244.01 shall be to operate the Division of Streets, to keep all streets in good
condition and in efficient and continuous operation and to perform any and all
other duties which are necessary and incidental to the condition and operation,
all to be under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as Director of
Public Service.
(Ord. 68-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 244.03  CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   The Superintendent of Streets shall be in the unclassified service in
accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
   (b)   All other employees in the Division of Streets shall be in the
classified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(B).
(Ord. 68-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
CHAPTER 246:  PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICERS
Section
   
246.01   Director of Utilities
   
246.02   Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant
   
246.03   Superintendent of the Water Treatment Plant
   
246.04   Superintendent of Electric Distribution, Generation, and
Communications
   
246.05   Superintendent of Streets, Water Distribution, and Wastewater
Collection
   
246.06   Authority of Director of Public Service
   
246.07   Director of Utilities as Acid Rain Permit and Compliance
Representative
Cross-reference:
   Division of Electricity and Communications, see
Ch. 248
   Division of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers, see
Ch. 252
   Division of Water, see
Ch. 250
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   Utilities in flood hazard areas, see §
1466.16
§ 246.01  DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of Utilities, which
Director shall have charge of the operations of all the municipal utilities of
the city and to see that the same are kept in continuous and efficient
operation, under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as Director of
Public Service.  The Director of Utilities shall be in the unclassified service
in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 21-91, passed 10-7-1991; Ord. 4-2003, passed 2-18-2003; Ord. 9-2019,
passed 5-6-2019)
§ 246.02  SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.
   The Office of Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant is hereby
established, which office shall consist of one person who shall be known as the
Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant.  Said Superintendent shall be
appointed by the Mayor, as Director of Public Service, according to law. Said
Superintendent shall have charge of all operations at the Wastewater Treatment
Plant of the city and shall see that the same is kept in continuous and
efficient operation, under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as
Director of Public Service. Said Superintendent shall be licensed as required
by the State of Ohio and shall be in the unclassified service in accordance
with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 66-2000, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 9-2019, passed 5-6-2019)
§ 246.03  SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WATER TREATMENT PLANT.
   The Office of Superintendent of Water is hereby established, which office
shall consist of one person who shall be known as the Superintendent of Water. 
Said Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor, as Director of Public
Service, according to law. Said Superintendent shall have charge of all
operations at the Water Treatment Plant of the city and shall see that the same
is kept in continuous and efficient operation, under the supervision and
direction of the Mayor as Director of Public Service. Said Superintendent shall
be licensed as required by the State of Ohio and shall be in the unclassified
service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 2-86, passed 1-6-1986; Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 9-2019, passed 5-
6-2019)
§ 246.04  SUPERINTENDENT OF ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION, GENERATION, AND
COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Office of Superintendent of Electric Distribution, Generation, and
Communications is hereby established, which office shall consist of one person
who shall be known as the Superintendent of Electric Distribution, Generation,
and Communications. Said Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor, as
Director of Public Service, according to law. Said Superintendent shall have
charge of all operations of the electric distribution system, generation, and
the communication system of the city and shall see that the same is kept in
continuous and efficient operation, under the supervision and direction of the
Mayor as Director of Public Service. Said Superintendent shall be licensed as
required by the State of Ohio and shall be in the unclassified service in
accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 19-84, passed 8-6-1984; Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 9-2019, passed
5-6-2019)
§ 246.05  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS, WATER DISTRIBUTION, AND WASTEWATER
COLLECTION.
   The Office of Superintendent of Streets, Water Distribution, and Wastewater
Collection is hereby established, which office shall consist of one person who
shall be known as the Superintendent of Streets, Water Distribution, and
Wastewater Collection. Said Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor, as
Director of Public Service, according to law. Said Superintendent shall have
charge of all operations of the streets, water distribution, and wastewater
collection of the city and shall see that the same are kept in continuous and
efficient operation, under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as
Director of Public Service. Said Superintendent shall be licensed as required
by the State of Ohio and shall be in the unclassified service in accordance
with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3)(c).
(Ord. 19-84, passed 8-6-1984; Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 9-2019, passed
5-6-2019)
§ 246.06  AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   The Director of Public Service shall have charge of all utility collections
of the city and shall see that the same are continuously and efficiently made.
(Ord. 37-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 9-2019, passed 5-6-2019)
§ 246.07  DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES AS ACID RAIN PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE
REPRESENTATIVE.
   The Director of Utilities is hereby designated as the representative for
purposes of acid rain permit and compliance activities in conjunction with the
1.825-megawatt generator located at the Wastewater Treatment Plant on London
West Road.
(Res. 25-2000, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 9-2019, passed 5-6-2019)
CHAPTER 248:  DIVISION OF ELECTRICITY AND COMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
248.01   Establishment; membership
   
248.02   Personnel
   
248.03   Duties
   
248.04   Civil service classification
   
248.05   Customers
Cross-reference:
   Electric service, see
Ch. 1050
   Licensing of electricians and electrical contractors, see §
1424.05
   National Electrical Code, see
Ch. 1424
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   Superintendent of Electric Distribution, see §
246.05
§ 248.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established within the Department of Public Service a
Division of Electricity and Communications, to consist of the Municipal Light
Plant, the Electric Distribution System and the Municipal Utilities Office.
(Ord. 27-85, passed 10-21-1985; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 248.02  PERSONNEL.
   (a)   The personnel at the Municipal Light Plant shall consist of the
Superintendent of the Municipal Light Plant and such other employees as it is
necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
   (b)   The personnel at the Electric Distribution System shall consist of the
Superintendent of Electric Distribution and such other employees as it is
necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
   (c)   The personnel at the Municipal Utilities Office shall consist of such
employees as it is necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
(Ord. 4-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 248.03  DUTIES.
   The duties of the persons filling the positions established in §
248.02 shall be to operate the Division of Electricity and Communications, to
keep the same in efficient and continuous operation and to perform any and all
other duties which are necessary and incidental to such operations, all to be
under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 27-85, passed 10-21-1985; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 248.04  CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   The Superintendent of the Municipal Light Plant and the Superintendent
of Electric Distribution shall be in the unclassified service in accordance
with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
   (b)   All other employees in the Division of Electricity and Communications
shall be in the classified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(B).
(Ord. 4-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 248.05  CUSTOMERS.
   (a)   It shall be the policy of the city and the objective of the Division
of Electricity and Communications to serve all electric customers within the
corporate limits when such service is in the best interests of the city and the
Division.
   (b)   It shall be the policy of the city and the objectives of the Division
of Electricity and Communications to serve electric customers outside the
corporate limits when such service is in the best interests of the city and the
Division and within any limits imposed by law.
(Ord. 28-86, passed 10-20-1986; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
CHAPTER 250:  DIVISION OF WATER
Section
   
250.01   Establishment; membership
   
250.02   Personnel
   
250.03   Duties
   
250.04   Civil service classification
Cross-reference:
   Alteration of watercourses, see §
1466.14
   Cross-connections between water and sewer systems, see §
1042.21
   Dumping into watercourses, see §
660.12
   Polluting and diverting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   Superintendent of Water, see §
246.03
   Water connections, see Charter §
93
   Water regulations, see
Ch. 1040
   Water wells, see §
1296.10
§ 250.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established within the Department of Public Service a
Division of Water, to consist of the Water Treatment Plant, the Water
Distribution System and the Municipal Utilities Office.
(Ord. 3-86, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 250.02  PERSONNEL.
   (a)   The personnel at the Water Treatment Plant shall consist of the
Superintendent of Water and such other employees as it is necessary from time
to time to hire and appoint.
   (b)   The personnel at the Water Distribution System shall consist of the
Superintendent of Water and such other employees as it is necessary from time
to time to hire and appoint.
   (c)   The personnel at the Municipal Utilities Office shall consist of such
employees as it is necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
(Ord. 5-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 250.03  DUTIES.
   The duties of the persons filling the positions established in §
250.02 shall be to operate the Division of Water, to keep the same in efficient
and continuous operation and to perform any and all other duties which are
necessary and incidental to such operation, all to be under the supervision and
direction of the Mayor as Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 3-86, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 250.04  CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   The Superintendent of Water shall be in the unclassified service in
accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
   (b)   All other employees in the Division of Water shall be in the
classified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(B).
(Ord. 5-88, passed 3-7-1988)
CHAPTER 252:  DIVISION OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND SEWERS
Section
   
252.01   Establishment; membership
   
252.02   Personnel
   
252.03   Duties
   
252.04   Civil service classification
Cross-reference:
   Approval of sanitary sewer disposal systems required prior to issuance of
building permits or zoning certificates, see §
1262.07
   Disconnection of sewers after moving of buildings, see §
1472.05
   Dumping into sewers, see §
660.12
   Private sewage disposal systems, see
Ch. 1046
   Sewer charges, see
Ch. 1044
   Sewer licenses, see § 1440.02
   Sewer regulations, see
Ch. 1042
   Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment Plant and Sewers, see §
246.02
§ 252.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established within the Department of Public Service a
Division of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers, to consist of the Wastewater
Treatment Plant, the sewer collection system and the Municipal Utilities
Office.
(Ord. 67-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 252.02  PERSONNEL.
   (a)   The personnel at the Wastewater Treatment Plant shall consist of the
Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant and Sewers and such other
employees as it is necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
   (b)   The personnel at the Municipal Utilities Office shall consist of such
employees as it is necessary from time to time to hire and appoint.
(Ord. 67-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 252.03  DUTIES.
   The duties of the persons filling the positions established in §
252.02 shall be to operate the Division of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers, to
keep the same in efficient and continuous operation and to perform any and all
other duties which are necessary and incidental to such operation, all to be
under the supervision and direction of the Mayor as Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 67-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 252.04  CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant and Sewers shall
be in the unclassified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(A)(3).
   (b)   All other employees in the Division of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers
shall be in the classified service in accordance with R.C. § 124.11(B).
(Ord. 67-2000, passed 12-18-2000)
CHAPTER 258:  ELECTED OFFICIALS' SALARIES
Section
   
258.01   Salaries of members of Council
   
258.02   Salary of the Mayor
   
258.03   Salary of the Director of Law
   
258.04   Salary of the Director of Finance and Public Record
   
258.05   Fringe benefits
   
258.06   Salary of Acting Mayor
Cross-reference:
   Council, see
Ch. 220
   Director of Finance and Public Record, see
Ch. 234
   Director of Law, see
Ch. 232
   Mayor, see
Ch. 230
§ 258.01  SALARIES OF MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2018, through January 6, 2020, the salary for
each member of City Council shall be $7,415 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (b)   Effective January 6, 2020, through January 3, 2022, the salary for
each member of City Council shall be $7,920 annually, to be paid biweekly.
(Ord. 1-2001, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2-2005,
passed 2-11-2005; Ord. 1-2007, passed 2-5-2007; Ord. 1-2009, passed 2-2-2009;
Ord. 1-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2-2013, passed 2-4-2013; Ord. 1-2015, passed
2-2-2015; Ord. 2-2017, passed 2-6-2017; Ord. 1-2019, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 258.02  SALARY OF THE MAYOR.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019, the salary for
the Mayor shall be $59,624 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (b)   Effective January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020, the salary for
the Mayor shall be $67,169 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (c)   Effective January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021, the salary for
the Mayor shall be $68,512 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (d)   Effective January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022, the salary for
the Mayor shall be $69,882 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (e)   Effective January 1, 2023, through December 31, 2023, the salary for
the Mayor shall be $70,581 annually, to be paid biweekly.
(Ord. 1-2001, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2-2005,
passed 2-11-2005; Ord. 1-2009, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 1-2011, passed 2-7-2011;
Ord. 1-2015, passed 2-2-2015; Ord. 1-2019, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 258.03  SALARY OF THE DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019, the salary for
the Director of Law shall be $46,462 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (b)   Effective January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020, the salary for
the Director of Law shall be $47,856 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (c)   Effective January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021, the salary for
the Director of Law shall be $48,813 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (d)   Effective January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022, the salary for
the Director of Law shall be $49,789 annually, to be paid biweekly.
   (e)   Effective January 1, 2023, through December 31, 2023, the salary for
the Director of Law shall be $50,287 annually, to be paid biweekly.
(Ord. 1-2001, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 1-2007,
passed 2-5-2007; Ord. 1-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 1-2015, passed 2-2-2015;
Ord. 1-2019, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 258.04  SALARY OF THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND PUBLIC RECORD.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019, the salary for
the Director of Finance and Public Record shall be $56,707 annually, to be paid
biweekly.
   (b)   Effective January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020, the salary for
the Director of Finance and Public Record shall be $58,408 annually, to be paid
biweekly.
   (c)   Effective January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021, the salary for
the Director of Finance and Public Record shall be $59,576 annually, to be paid
biweekly.
   (d)   Effective January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022, the salary for
the Director of Finance and Public Record shall be $60,768 annually, to be paid
biweekly.
   (e)   Effective January 1, 2023, through December 31, 2023, the salary for
the Director of Finance and Public Record shall be $61,376 annually, to be paid
biweekly.
(Ord. 1-2001, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 1-2007,
passed 2-5-2007; Ord. 1-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 1-2015, passed 2-2-2015;
Ord. 1-2019, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 258.05  FRINGE BENEFITS.
   In addition to the aforementioned salaries, benefits shall be provided as
set forth below.
   (a)   The city shall pay the full cost of health and dental insurance for
the Mayor, Director of Law, Director of Finance and Public Record, and the
Judge of the Shelby Municipal Court and their dependents.  The city shall have
the right to change insurance carriers or coverage so long as the city shall
retain comparable or better coverage.
   (b)   The city shall pay the full cost of a life insurance policy in the
amount of no less than $50,000 on each of the lives of the Mayor, the Director
of Law, the Director of Finance and Public Record, the Judge of the Shelby
Municipal Court, and each member of City Council.
   (c)   This section shall take effect on January 1, 2004.
(Ord. 1-2001, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 258.06  SALARY OF ACTING MAYOR.
   Any person who serves as Acting Mayor for more than 14 consecutive days in
accordance with §
26 of the Charter of the City of Shelby shall receive the salary of the Mayor
in lieu of his or her regular salary. This section shall be effective January
1, 2009.
(Ord. 4-2009, passed 3-2-2009)
CHAPTER 260:  EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Editor's note:
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to regular
compensation are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   The city enters into Agreements, from time to time, with representatives of
various classes of municipal employees, which Agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and other incidents of employment.  The provisions of
this chapter, therefore, apply only to those persons and those subjects not
otherwise provided for in such Agreements.  In the event of a conflict between
any of the provisions of such Agreements and a provision of this chapter, the
provision of the Agreement shall control.  Copies of the latest relevant
legislation and of such Agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
Section
   
260.01   Bonds
   
260.02   Use of city vehicles
   
260.03   Equal employment opportunity
   
260.04   Mileage allowance
   
260.05   Pick-up of Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund
   
260.06   Pick-up of P.E.R.S.
   
260.07   Sick leave
   
260.08   Personal days
   
260.09   Holidays
   
260.10   Vacations
   
260.11   Termination of employment
   
260.12   Longevity compensation
   
260.13   Health insurance; life insurance; dental insurance
   
260.14   Check-off
   
260.15   Grievance procedure
   
260.16   Uniform allowances
   
260.17   Benefits for part-time employees
   
260.18   Calendar year method of recordkeeping
   
260.19   Compensation for hourly noncertified employees
   
260.20   Overtime for department heads; compensatory time
   
260.21   Paydays
   
260.22   Funeral leave
   
260.23   Jury duty
   
260.24   Miscellaneous pay
   
260.25   Compensation for certain positions
   
260.26   Drug testing and assistance
   
260.27   Training and education
Cross-reference:
   Council to fix employee bond, see Charter §§
18,
117
   Unclassified employee, see Charter §
19
   Unlawful interest in public contract, see Charter §
121
Statutory reference:
   Compensation not to be changed during term, see Const., Art. II, § 20
   Deductions for hospital service plan, see R.C. § 1739.15
   Deductions for labor dues and savings, see R.C. §§ 9.41, 9.43
   Deductions for municipal income tax, see R.C. § 9.42
   Expenses, see R.C. §§ 733.79, 737.23
   Leave for military training, see R.C. § 5923.05 
   Public Employees Retirement System, see R.C. Ch. 145
   Wages and hours on public works, see Const., Art. II, § 37; R.C. Ch. 4123
   Welfare, see Const., Art. II, § 34
   Workers' compensation, see Const., Art. II, § 35; R.C. Ch. 4123
§ 260.01  BONDS.
   (a)   In accordance with Charter §§
18 and
117, the following officers, clerks and employees shall give a bond in the
amounts noted herein with surety to the approval of the Mayor and Council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective
duties, and then filed with the Director of Finance and Public Record. The city
shall pay the premium on the bonds.
   (b)   The bond of the Mayor (ex officio Treasury Investment Account trustee)
shall be $50,000.
   (c)   The bond of the Director of Law (ex officio Treasury Investment
Account trustee) shall be $25,000.
   (d)   The bond of the Director of Finance and Public Record (ex officio City
Treasury and ex officio Treasury Investment Account trustee) shall be $100,000.
   (e)   The bond of the Assistant Director of Finance and Public Record shall
be $100,000.
   (f)   The bond of the Bailiff of the Shelby Municipal Court shall be $3,000.
   (g)   A blanket bond in the amount of $250,000 shall be purchased by the
city to cover all employees, officers, clerks and officials, including those
noted above.
   (h)   The bonds noted herein shall be in effect on and after January 1,
2005.
(Ord. 42-2004, passed 12-6-2004)
§ 260.02  USE OF CITY VEHICLES.
   The purpose of this section is to provide a clear set of policies and
guidelines regulating the use of city-owned and leased vehicles by city
employees and to avoid any conflicts or misunderstandings regarding their use.
Any violations of this section may result in disciplinary action, including but
not limited to verbal warning, written reprimand, time off without pay
(suspension), loss of use of vehicle, termination or fine. The city vehicle
policy and guidelines are set forth in the divisions that follow.
   (a)   City-owned or leased vehicles are to be utilized exclusively for city
business and matters related to the operation of the services provided by the
city to the community. This policy covers all vehicles owned or leased by the
city.
   (b)   No city vehicle shall be used or operated for the daily purpose of
transporting any city employee to and from work, unless one or both of the
following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator of the vehicles is on a 24-hour call to meet valid
emergency situations; or
      (2)   The department head to which the vehicle is assigned can provide
justification to the Council that such take-home use is in the best financial
interest of the city.
   (c)   The Mayor, with the advice of the department head, may grant temporary
use of city vehicles for commute purposes when deemed appropriate or necessary,
subject to the restrictions set forth in divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall report the use of
vehicles in accordance with the guidelines of the Internal Revenue Service
Code. The vehicles are not an inducement for employment nor should they be
considered as compensation.
   (e)   City employees in the following positions will be provided with a
vehicle to be used for city business only and commuting privileges while in and
outside the corporate limits of the city:
      (1)   Police Chief; and
      (2)   Fire Chief.
   (f)   Additional proposals for vehicles to be used for commuting privileges
shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and submitted in ordinance form
for Council's subsequent approval or rejection.
   (g)   The Mayor, at his or her discretion, may authorize extended use of the
vehicles for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (h)   No employee shall operate a city vehicle or heavy equipment or
machinery if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
or the combined influence of alcohol and any drug of abuse;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.04 of 1% or more by weight of
alcohol in his or her blood (employees 21 years of age or older) or a
concentration of 0.02 of 1% or more by weight of alcohol in his or her blood
(employees under the age of 21);
      (3)   The person has a concentration of 0.04 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 210 liters of his or her breath (employees 21 years of
age or older) or a concentration of 0.02 of 1% or more by weight of alcohol per
210 liters of his or her breath (employees under the age of 21); or
      (4)   The person has a concentration of 0.06 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his or her urine (employees 21 years
of age or older) or a concentration of 0.028 of one gram or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters (employees under the age of 21).
   (i)   Non-employees are not permitted to ride in a city vehicle except for
business-related reasons (i.e., carpooling to a permitted function). Only in
extreme emergency (i.e., safety) would a non-employee minor be permitted to
ride in a city vehicle. Activities such as routinely dropping children off at
school or picking them up from day care are strictly forbidden. Non-employees
participating in bona fide educational or community activities may be permitted
to ride in city vehicles with permission of the department head.
   (j)   Safety belts are to be used at all times when driving or riding in a
city vehicle. No tobacco products shall be used in any city vehicle.
   (k)   All vehicles owned or leased by the city are to be operated and
maintained in a safe and efficient manner. The operator of any such vehicle
shall be responsible for reporting any defect, damage or unsuitable condition
of any city vehicle to his or her department head. All operators of city
vehicles must be properly licensed in accordance with Ohio law to operate the
class of city vehicle so operated and shall provide to their department head
proof of being so licensed upon request, and in any event, each time his or her
license is renewed. Each employee who operates a city vehicle must provide a
copy of his or her license to his or her department head, who shall be
responsible for maintaining a current list of all employee's licenses who may
operate a city vehicle.
   (l)   Any employee who sustains or causes injury or damage to any property
while in possession or being assigned a city vehicle shall report the damage or
injury immediately to any governmental authority as is required by law and
thereafter promptly report in writing, the details of the occurrence to his or
her department head.  Failure to promptly report the details of any occurrence
to the employee's department head may result in disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
   (m)   In the event an employee's driver's license expires or is revoked,
suspended, forfeited or restricted in any manner, the employee shall be
required to report that information within 72 hours of its occurrence to his or
her department head, or within 24 hours of returning from vacation or other
authorized leave if the expiration, revocation, suspension, forfeiture or
restriction occurred during such leave.
   (n)   City-owned gas and other vehicle fluids and parts shall be placed into
city vehicles only. No employee is permitted to place city-owned gas or other
fuel in his or her own personal or other private vehicle under any
circumstances.
   (o)   Employees who operate their personal vehicle for city business shall
be paid mileage allowance in accordance with established city code.
   (p)   All vehicles owned or leased by the city shall display sufficient
signs or decals to indicate that they are city vehicles.
   (q)   It is the responsibility of the department heads to provide, keep and
maintain mileage logs regarding use of vehicles.
   (r)   Unmarked vehicles and cover license plates (tags) used by the city in
undercover investigatory operations are prohibited unless authorized by the
Mayor and Police Chief.
(Ord. 6-2005, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 260.03  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.
   The city hereby agrees that it will not discriminate against any employee
because of race, religion, creed, age, sex, national origin or ancestry,
political affiliation or disability, in accordance with the Civil Rights Act of
1964.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 260.04  MILEAGE ALLOWANCE.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 1998, the Director of Finance and Public Record
shall pay to an elected, salaried or appointed official or hourly employee of
the city the standard mileage rate as determined annually by the Internal
Revenue Service for the use of his or her private vehicle in the performance of
authorized city business.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, authorized city business shall be
such business and schooling which benefit the city and are approved by the
department head and authorized by the Mayor, as Director of Public Service.
   (c)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall pay the employee for
the mileage from the operating fund of the department in which the employee
works, upon submitting a completed request form which has been approved by the
department head and authorized by the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 8-92, passed 4-20-1992; Ord. 13-98, passed 3-16-1998)
§ 260.05  PICK-UP OF POLICE AND FIREFIGHTERS' DISABILITY AND PENSION FUND.
   (a)   Effective February 5, 1996, upon approval by the Mayor and the
earliest period allowed by law, the full amount of the statutorily required
contributions to the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund shall
be withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the classes
established in division (c) hereof and shall be picked up (assumed and paid to
the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund) by the city.  This
pick-up by the city is, and shall be designated as, public employee
contributions and shall be in lieu of contributions to the Police and
Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund by each person within any of the
classes established in division (c) hereof.  No person subject to this pick-up
shall have the option of choosing to receive the statutorily required
contribution to the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund
directly instead of having it picked up by the city, or of being excluded from
the pick-up.
   (b)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to the Police and
Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund, report that the public employee's
contribution for each person subject to this pick-up has been made as provided
by the statute.
   (c)   The pick-up by the city provided by this section shall apply to all
persons who are employees of the city and who are or become contributing
members of the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund.
   (d)   (1)   The city's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund is
hereby modified as follows, in order to provide for a salary reduction pick-up
of employee contributions to the Police and Firefighters' Disability and
Pension Fund.
      (2)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary otherwise
payable under the city's policies.  Such total salary of each employee shall be
payable by the city in two parts:  deferred salary; and cash salary.  An
employee's deferred salary shall be equal to that percentage of that employee's
total salary which is required from time to time by the Police and
Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund to be paid as an employee
contribution by that employee, and shall be paid by the city to the Police and
Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund on behalf of that employee as a pick-
up and in lieu of the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund
employee contribution otherwise payable by that employee.  An employee's cash
salary shall be equal to that employee's total salary less the amount of the
pick-up for that employee, and shall be payable, subject to applicable payroll
deductions, to that employee.  The city shall compute and remit its employer
contributions to the Police and Firefighters' Disability and Pension Fund based
upon an employee's total salary.  The total combined expenditures of the city
for such employees' total salaries, payable under applicable city policies and
the pick-up provisions of this section, shall not be greater than the amounts
it would have paid for those items had this provision not been in effect.
   (e)   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized and
directed to implement the provisions of this section to institute the pick-up
of the statutorily required contributions to the Police and Firefighters'
Disability and Pension Fund for those persons referred to in division (c)
hereof so as to enable them to obtain the result in federal and state tax
deferments and other benefits.
(Ord. 4-96, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 260.06  PICK-UP OF P.E.R.S.
   (a)   Effective February 5, 1996, upon approval by the Mayor and the
earliest period allowed by law, the full amount of the statutorily required
contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio shall be
withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the classes
established in division (c) hereof and shall be picked up (assumed and paid to
the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio) by the city.  This pick-up by
the city is, and shall be designated as, public employee contributions and
shall be in lieu of contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System of
Ohio by each person within any of the classes established in division (c)
hereof.  No person subject to this pick-up shall have the option of choosing to
receive the statutorily required contribution to the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio directly instead of having it picked up by the city,
or of being excluded from the pick-up.
   (b)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to the Public
Employees Retirement System of Ohio, report that the public employee's
contribution for each person subject to this pick-up has been made as provided
by the statute.
   (c)   The pick-up by the city provided by this section shall apply to all
persons who are employees of the city and who are or become contributing
members of the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio.
   (d)   (1)   The city's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio is hereby
modified as follows, in order to provide for a salary reduction pick-up of
employee contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio:
      (2)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary otherwise
payable under the city's policies.  Such total salary of each employee shall be
payable by the city in two parts: deferred salary; and cash salary.  An
employee's deferred salary shall be equal to that percentage of that employee's
total salary which is required from time to time by the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio to be paid as an employee contribution by that
employee, and shall be paid by the city to the Public Employees Retirement
System of Ohio on behalf of that employee as a pick-up and in lieu of the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio employee contribution otherwise
payable by that employee.  An employee's cash salary shall be equal to that
employee's total salary less the amount of the pick-up for that employee, and
shall be payable, subject to applicable payroll deductions, to that employee. 
The city shall compute and remit its employer contributions to the Public
Employees Retirement System of Ohio based upon an employee's total salary.  The
total combined expenditures of the city for such employees' total salaries,
payable under applicable city policies and the pick-up provisions of this
section, shall not be greater than the amounts it would have paid for those
items had this provision not been in effect.
   (e)   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized and
directed to implement the provisions of this section to institute the pick-up
of the statutorily required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement
System of Ohio for those persons referred to in division (c) hereof so as to
enable them to obtain the result in federal and state tax deferments and other
benefits.
(Ord. 5-96, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 260.07  SICK LEAVE.
   (a)   An employee shall be entitled to sick leave at his or her regular rate
of pay, accumulated at the rate of one and one-fourth working days for each
completed month of service.  An employee may use sick leave only upon the
approval of the Director of Public Service for absences due to personal
illness, injury or exposure to contagious disease (which could be communicated
to other employees) and to illness, injury or death in the employee's immediate
family.  Unused sick leave shall be accumulated.
   (b)   Previously accumulated sick leave of an employee who has been
separated from the public service may be placed to his or her credit upon his
or her re-employment in the public service, provided that such re-employment
takes place within ten years of the date on which the employee was last
terminated from the city services. An employee who transfers from one
department to another shall be credited with the unused balance of his or her
accumulated sick leave.
   (c)   Accumulated sick leave shall be allowed only under the following
specific terms and conditions: illness, injury or exposure to contagious
disease suffered by the employee, or serious illness, injury or death in the
employee's immediate family. To be valid, all sick leave applications for
absences of three days or more must be certified by a doctor.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, an employee's "immediate family" shall
be deemed to be his or her spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters or such
dependents as may be members of his or her immediate household.
   (e)   An employee who has accumulated sick leave in excess of 90 days may
forfeit his or her accumulated sick leave for additional vacation. Each
employee with such an excess of sick leave may forfeit two days of sick leave
in exchange for one additional day of vacation. No employee shall be entitled
to more than five additional days of vacation in any year. Further, no employee
shall be permitted to forfeit sick leave if doing so would reduce the
employee's sick leave total below 90 days. Only sick leave which has been
accrued can be forfeited in exchange for additional vacation time.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.08  PERSONAL DAYS.
   All employees covered by this chapter shall be allowed two days of personal
leave in each calendar year. Personal leave shall be used to cover unforeseen
absences which occur during the calendar year. Personal leave shall not be
accumulated from year to year. Any personal leave not taken shall be forfeited.
Employees using personal leave shall have that day deducted from sick leave. An
employee should make a reasonable effort to contact his or her immediate
supervisor as soon as reasonably possible prior to taking his or her personal
day of leave.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.09  HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   The official paid holidays of the city are as follows:
      (1)   New Year's Day - January 1;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Day - third Monday in January;
      (3)   Presidents' Day - third Monday in February;
      (4)   Memorial Day - last Monday in May;
      (5)   Independence Day - July 4;
      (6)   Labor Day - first Monday in September;
      (7)   Veterans Day - November 11;
      (8)   Thanksgiving Day - fourth Thursday in November; and
      (9)   Christmas Day - December 25.
   (b)   In addition to the nine holidays set forth in division (a) hereof, all
employees covered by this chapter shall, after one continuing year of service,
receive two floating holidays per calendar year, which shall be taken off
anytime during the calendar year and prior to December 31 of any given year. An
employee must clear his or her date selection with the Mayor or department
head. Each department head shall keep accurate records of all time taken off
within his or her department.
   (c)   An employee shall be paid the holidays as aforesaid and shall not be
required to work any such holidays, unless, in the opinion of the Director of
Public Service, or Director of Public Safety, failure to work on the holiday
would impair public service or safety. Each employee working on such a holiday
shall receive compensation time in lieu of overtime pay.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 60-2003,  passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 3-2017,
passed 2-21-2017)
§ 260.10  VACATIONS.
   (a)   After one full year of service with the city, all full-time employees
covered by this chapter shall have earned vacation as follows:
      (1)   Ten days' vacation after one year of service;
      (2)   Fifteen days' vacation after five years of service;
      (3)   Twenty days' vacation after 14 years of service; and
      (4)   Twenty-five days' vacation after 20 years of service.
   (b)   All vacations shall be approved by the Director of Public Service and
no employee shall be permitted to take more than three consecutive weeks at any
time.
   (c)   All vacations are to be set up and scheduled by the department heads
and/or the Mayor. Years of accrual shall be the employee's anniversary date.
   (d)   In the event that a holiday falls within an employee's paid vacation
period, the employee shall receive one extra day's wages. However, an employee
cannot take a one-day vacation on a recognized holiday.
   (e)   With the approval of the Mayor, a maximum of two weeks of unused
vacation may be carried over from one year to the next.
   (f)   With the approval of the Mayor, an employee may choose to receive pay
in lieu of unused vacation. This option shall be limited to two weeks of unused
vacation during any one year. Compensation shall be based on the employee's
straight-time wage rate.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 260.11  TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   An employee hired prior to January 1, 1987, whose employment is
terminated by reason of death, disability or voluntary retirement (P.E.R.S. or
equivalent), shall receive all accumulated sick leave up to 90 days, as well as
the following:
      (1)   All unused and recorded compensatory time to be paid at the rate of
pay at the time of separation, not to exceed 480 hours;
      (2)   All vacation time that is accrued and all unused vacation time for
that year;
      (3)   Floating holidays that are accrued but unused, not to exceed two
floating holidays, to be paid in cash at the rate of pay at the time of
separation; and
      (4)   Longevity for all full and consecutive months for that year in
which the employee is separated from city employment and has not been paid by
the city.
   (b)   Upon the retirement of an employee hired after January 1, 1987, who
has not less than ten years of continuous employment with the city and who has
qualified for retirement benefits from the State of Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System, such employee shall be entitled to receive a cash payment
equal to his or her hourly rate of pay at the time of retirement multiplied by
one-third the total number of accumulated but unused sick hours earned by the
employee, as certified by the city, provided that such resulting number of
hours to be paid shall not exceed 90 days, as well as the following:
      (1)   All unused and recorded compensatory time to be paid at the rate of
pay at the time of separation, not to exceed 480 hours;
      (2)   All vacation time that is accrued and all unused vacation time for
that year;
      (3)   Floating holidays that are accrued but unused, not to exceed two
floating holidays, to be paid in cash at the rate of pay at the time of
separation; and
      (4)   Longevity for all full and consecutive months for that year in
which the employee is separated from city employment and has not been paid by
the city.
   (c)   An employee who voluntarily terminates employment with a two-week
written notice shall receive the following:
      (1)   All unused and recorded compensatory time to be paid at the rate of
pay at the time of separation, not to exceed 160 hours;
      (2)   All vacation time that is accrued and all unused vacation time for
that year;
      (3)   Floating holidays that are accrued but unused, not to exceed two
floating holidays, to be paid in cash at the rate of pay at the time of
separation; and
      (4)   Longevity for all full and consecutive months for that year in
which the employee is separated from city employment and has not been paid by
the city.
   (d)   An employee whose employment is terminated for reasons other than
death, disability or voluntary retirement (P.E.R.S. or equivalent), or who does
not submit a two-week written notice, shall forfeit any and all accumulated
pay.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 260.12  LONGEVITY COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2004, longevity compensation will be paid to all
city employees covered by this chapter with five years or more of continuous
service with the city, at the rate set forth in division (b) below for each
full and consecutive year of service, based upon each employee's date of hire,
up to a maximum of 30 years, or $1,500. Longevity shall be payable the first
payday in December of each year.
   (b)   Longevity compensation is as follows:
      (1)   Five to 11 years of service, $40 for each year;
      (2)   Twelve to 18 years of service,  $45 for each year; and
      (3)   Nineteen to 30 years of service, $50 for each year.
   (c)   Any employee covered by this chapter currently employed as of January
1, 2004, with less than five years of service shall continue to receive
longevity at the rate of $3 per month for each full and consecutive year of
service, until reaching five years of service, at which time the employee shall
be covered by the longevity schedule set forth in division (b) of this section.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 260.13  HEALTH INSURANCE; LIFE INSURANCE; DENTAL INSURANCE.
   (a)   All employees covered by this chapter shall be insured by the city's
PPO (Preferred Provider Organization) health insurance. Employees will not be
required to make contributions towards the premiums associated with this
coverage, except for the appropriate deductibles, and this program will include
vision and dental care programs.
   (b)   The city shall have the right to change insurance carriers or coverage
as long as the employees retain comparable or better coverage.  The Director of
Public Service is hereby authorized to enter into a contract with the
appropriate insurance company or to advertise for bids for insurance if
advertising for bids is deemed to be necessary.
   (c)   A life insurance policy in the amount of $50,000  shall be carried on
each nonelective full-time city employee.  The city shall pay the full cost of
the $50,000 life insurance policy.
   (d)   The type of plan or plans chosen, the amount and extent of coverage
and the time the city shall participate in payment is within the discretion of
the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 3-97, passed 1-20-1997; Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 46-2005,
passed 12-5-2005)
§ 260.14  CHECK-OFF.
   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized to provide
for the following check-off for employees:
   (a)   Bonds;
   (b)   Approved group insurance premiums;
   (c)   Credit union;
   (d)   IRAs;
   (e)   Disability insurance premiums;
   (f)   Court-ordered child support; and/or
   (g)   Military buy-out.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.15  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   The Mayor shall establish and publish a standard grievance procedure.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.16  UNIFORM ALLOWANCES.
   The Chief of Police shall receive a uniform allowance the same as that
received by captains in the Police Department. The Fire Chief shall receive a
uniform allowance the same as that received by captains in the Fire Department.
The allowance shall be paid from their respective department funds. The
allowance shall be earned semi-annually and shall be paid on January 1 and July
1 of each year. Allowance, for purposes of this section, becomes effective on
January 1, 1995. Any unused portion of this allowance shall be forfeited upon
death, retirement or termination of employment.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.17  BENEFITS FOR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   Part-time employees, as defined herein, shall not receive any fringe
benefits as outlined in this chapter, with the exception of the Secretary to
the Law Director, who shall have the option of receiving hospitalization and
life insurance benefits for 50%  of the employer group cost. A part-time
employee is any employee working 30 hours or less per week.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.18  CALENDAR YEAR METHOD OF RECORDKEEPING.
   For purposes of departmental management, each department head in the city
may use the calendar year method of recordkeeping. In the event that the
calendar year method is selected, the department head shall immediately notify
the Director of Finance and Public Record so that all records may be
coordinated.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.19  COMPENSATION FOR HOURLY NONCERTIFIED EMPLOYEES.
   Compensation for all hourly noncertified employees covered by this chapter
shall be based on actual hours worked.  A written record of actual hours worked
by the employees, approved by the appropriate supervisor, shall be submitted to
the Director of Finance and Public Record for each pay period.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 260.20  OVERTIME FOR DEPARTMENT HEADS; COMPENSATORY TIME.
   Department heads, chiefs, superintendents and/or managers shall not receive
payment for any overtime worked.  Each department head shall keep a record of
his or her service on a biweekly basis.  The department superintendent, chief
or manager shall be permitted to take hours off as compensatory time equal to
the number of hours of overtime worked.  However, the same shall be subject to
the approval of the Mayor, who shall approve all requests that he or she deems
to be reasonable.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.21  PAYDAYS.
   Payday for all employees covered by this chapter shall be every other Friday
with a one-week hold-back.  Annual salary shall be divided into 26 equal
payments.
(Ord. 20-95, passed 11-20-1995)
§ 260.22  FUNERAL LEAVE.
   (a)   An employee shall be granted time off with pay for the purpose of
attending the funeral upon the death of a member of the employee's immediate
family.  The employee shall be entitled to a maximum of three workdays for each
death in his or her immediate family.  For purposes of this section, "immediate
family" shall be defined as to include only the employee's spouse, child,
parents, sister, brother, grandparents (whether natural or step),
grandchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
grandparents-in-law, to include, the step relation of all listed above, any
other relative living with the employee at the time of the death, and any
person who stood as in loco parentis to the employee as a child.
   (b)   If an employee requires more time than is provided for in division (a)
hereof, or should he or she wish to attend the funeral of any relative not
listed in division (a), he or she may utilize vacation time, sick leave,
compensatory time or leave without pay, with the approval of the employee's
department head.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 260.23  JURY DUTY.
   An employee serving on jury duty will give any money earned by him or her
for the days served on such jury duty to the city, and the city shall pay the
employee his or her regular compensation for the days served.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 260.24  MISCELLANEOUS PAY.
   An employee having an associate's or bachelor's degree in a field related to
his or her employment shall receive an additional three hours of pay in
addition to his or her regular pay.
(Ord. 9-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 260.25  COMPENSATION FOR CERTAIN POSITIONS.
   (a)   Persons filling the following positions will have their salaries
established as noted:
 
Position Set By:
Bailiff                                            Judge
City Sanitarian                                    Division of Health
Deputy Clerk of Courts                             Clerk of Courts
Deputy Clerk of Courts (part-time)                 Clerk of Courts
Director of Environmental Health/ Assistant Health Division of Health
Commissioner
Health Inspector                                   Division of Health
Secretary-Department of Health                     Division of Health
 
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to pay such salaries in
the amounts instructed or requested.
   (c)   The Director of Finance shall report these salaries, the percentage
increase, and the dollar amount increase to City Council, the Mayor and the
Shelby Daily Globe, each and every time they change.
(Ord. 39-99, passed 7-19-1999; Ord. 2-2001, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 27-2001,
passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 32-2001, passed 7-2-2001; Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-
2003)
§ 260.26  DRUG TESTING AND ASSISTANCE.
   In order to comply with federal law and to provide a safe work environment
for the employees of the city, the Mayor is authorized to implement a Drug
Testing and Assistance Policy and Procedure for the employees of the city while
on the job. The policy shall include:
   (a)   Drug and alcohol testing program for commercial driver's license
holders;
   (b)   Drug and alcohol testing program for non-CDL employees; and
   (c)   Drug-free workplace and drug and alcohol program.
(1996 Code, § 260.27)  (Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 260.27  TRAINING AND EDUCATION.
   (a)   Any employee covered by this chapter who desires to attend job-related
training course or schools may submit a request to attend such course or school
to the Mayor not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of the course or
school. Attendance at the course or school shall be at the sole discretion of
the Mayor.
   (b)   The city will compensate the employee for approved expenses incurred
pursuant to division (a) hereof under the following terms:
      (1)   If the employee successfully completes the course or school
attended by obtaining a passing grade of 75% or better, and obtains the license
or certificate for which the school or course was given.
      (2)   The employee who successfully completes a course or school will
agree to remain with the city for a period of not less than one year from the
date of completion. Failure to do so shall result in the expenses of such
course or school being deducted from any and all of the employee's severance
pay, to the extent of the compensation set forth in division (a) hereof.
(1996 Code, § 260.28) (Ord. 60-2003, passed 12-15-2003)
TITLE EIGHT - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      Chapter
         
274.   CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
         
276.   DIVISION OF HEALTH
         
278.   BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS
         
282.   SHADE TREE COMMISSION
         
284.   FAIR HOUSING BOARD
         
286.   HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
         
289.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT COMMISSION
         
290.   BUILDING AND GROUNDS COMMISSION
         
292.   RECORDS COMMISSION
Editor's note:
   Board of Appeals for taxicab licensing, see §§
850.15,
850.16
   Board of Review, see §§
880.13,
884.10
   Board of Revision of Assessments, see Charter §
81
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see
Chapter 1264, Board of Zoning Appeals
   City Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220, City Planning Commission
   Earned Income Tax Board of Review, see in
Chapter 880, Earned Income Tax
   Traffic Commission, see §
406.01
CHAPTER 274:  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
   
274.01   Establishment; membership
   
274.02   Compensation
Cross-reference:
   Classification of Division of Electricity and Communications personnel, see
§
248.04
   Classification of Division of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers personnel, see
§
252.04
   Classification of employees in Division of Streets, see §
244.03
   Classification of Water Division personnel, see §
250.04
   Establishment, see Charter §
52
Statutory reference:
   Application to police and fire personnel, see R.C. §§ 737.051, 737.10,
737.11
   Civil service, see Const., Art. XV, § 10
   Civil Service Law, see R.C. Ch. 124
§ 274.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established a Civil Service Commission for the city, to
consist of three members to be appointed by the Mayor for terms of two, four
and six years, respectively. Each two years thereafter one member shall be
appointed for a term of six years.
(Ord. 62, passed 11-14-1924)
§ 274.02  COMPENSATION.
   The salary of a member of the Civil Service Commission shall be $25 per
annum, payable on or about the first day of December.
(Ord. 1-2000, passed 2-22-2000)
CHAPTER 276:  DIVISION OF HEALTH
Section
   
276.01   Establishment
   
276.02   Appointment and duties of Health Commissioner
   
276.03   Investigation of complaints; correction; reports to Council
   
276.04   Food service/retail food establishment license fees
   
276.05   Body art approval fees
   
276.06   Private water system fees
   
276.07   Public swimming pool license fees
   
276.08   Birth and death certificate fees
   
276.09   Sewage treatment system fees
   
276.10   Health Department Advisory Board
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Ohio Sanitary Code, see §
1042.18
   Adoption of regulations re private sewage disposal systems, see §
1046.01
   Contagious disease, see §
660.02
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Sanitation regulations on reservoir property, see §
1064.07
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of orders, see R.C. §§ 3707.02, 3707.48 et seq.
   Inspection of food and food products, see R.C. § 3707.38
   Powers and nuisances, see R.C. §§ 3707.01 et seq., 3709.36
   Quarantine and communicable disease, see R.C. § 3707.04
   Rabies quarantine, see R.C. § 955.26
§ 276.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   In accordance with §
50 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby established a division of the
Department of Public Safety hereafter referred to as the Division of Health.
The Mayor shall make all rules and regulations as are necessary and required
for the government of this division as prescribed by local ordinance or the
general laws of the State of Ohio. The Mayor, as head of this Division, shall
be responsible for and succeed to all of the duties and responsibilities which
prior hereto were the obligation of the Board of Health. The Director of
Finance and Public Record shall be charged with the management, control and
budgeting of any and all funds previously managed by the Board of Health
(including but not limited to any and all moneys collected or to be collected
as the result of any ballot issues previously voted upon and passed for the
benefit of the Shelby Board of Health).
(Ord. 38-2005, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 276.02  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   The Director of Public Welfare, who shall be the Health Commissioner of the
city, appointed by the Mayor pursuant to §
50 of the City Charter, shall have the powers and duties prescribed by §
50 of the City Charter as well as those prescribed by these Codified Ordinances
and any other ordinances and resolutions of the city and any rules and
regulations adopted for the public welfare and health of the city.
(1923 Code, §§ 5, 134)
§ 276.03  INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; CORRECTION; REPORTS TO COUNCIL.
   The Health Commissioner shall investigate, as soon as possible, all
complaints of nuisances reported to him or her and shall take immediate
measures to remove or abate the same when found to exist. He or she shall make
such reports to Council as Council may from time to time require.
(1923 Code, § 135)
§ 276.04  FOOD SERVICE/RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE FEES.
   The following food service/retail food establishment fees are hereby
adopted:
   (a)   Risk class 1:
      (1)   Business under 25,000 square feet: $112.50 + current state fee;
      (2)   Business over 25,000 square feet: $156.25 + current state fee.
   (b)   Risk class 2:
      (1)   Business under 25,000 square feet: $132.50 + current state fee;
      (2)   Business over 25,000 square feet: $180.00 + current state fee.
   (c)   Risk class 3:
      (1)   Business under 25,000 square feet: $225.00 + current state fee;
      (2)   Business over 25,000 square feet: $312.50 + current state fee.
   (d)   Risk class 4:
      (1)   Business under 25,000 square feet: $262.50 + current state fee;
      (2)   Business over 25,000 square feet: $391.25 + current state fee.
   (e)   Vending machine: $8.34 + 1.9% CPI = $8.50 + current state fee.
   (f)   Mobile food service: $89.00 + current state fee.
   (g)   Temporary food service: $=00.00 per event up to five days.
   (h)   Level I food safety training: $10.
   (i)   Level II certification in food protection: $125.
   (j)   Level II examination only:
      (1)   Shelby City: $25;
      (2)   Non-Shelby City: $50.
(Ord. 53-2005, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 40-2011, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 15-
2012, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 14-2013, passed 4-15-2013; Ord. 27-2014, passed 2-
17-2015; Ord. 15-2016, passed 7-5-2016; Ord. 27-2016, passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 4-
2017, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 6-2017, passed 4-3- 2017; Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-
16-2017; Ord. 22- 2018, passed 10-15-2018; Ord. 27-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 276.05  BODY ART APPROVAL FEES.
   The following body art approval fees are hereby adopted:
   (a)   Tattooing services: $125 + current state fee.
   (b)   Body piercing services: $125 + current state fee.
   (c)   Combined body art services: $125 + current state fee.
   (d)   Time limited approval for a specific event: $125 + current state fee.
   (e)   Late fee: 25% of local fee.
(Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-16-2017)
§ 276.06  PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM FEES.
   The following private water system fees are hereby adopted:
   (a)   Single family dwelling.
      (1)   Well permit: $50 + current state fee + current Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) fee.
      (2)   Cistern permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (3)   Hauled water storage tank: $50 + current state fee + Current DNR
fee.
      (4)   Spring permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (5)   Pond permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (6)   Well conversion permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (7)   Alteration permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (8)   Well sealing permit: $10 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
   (b)   Non-single family dwelling.
      (1)   Well permit: $50 + current state fee + current Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) fee.
      (2)   Cistern permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (3)   Hauled water storage tank: $50 + current state fee + current DNR
fee.
      (4)   Spring permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (5)   Well conversion permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (6)   Alteration permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (7)   Well sealing permit: $10 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
   (c)   Other fees.
      (1)   Test well permit: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (2)   Contractor inspection: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (3)   Water sample: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (4)   Water hauler registration and vehicle inspection: $85 + current
state fee + current DNR fee.
      (5)   Variance: $50 + current state fee + current DNR fee.
      (6)   Late fee: 25% of local fee.
(Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-16-2017)
§ 276.07  PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL LICENCE FEES.
   The following public swimming pool license fees are hereby adopted:
   (a)   Public pool, spa, or special use pool: $175 + current state fee.
   (b)   Additional public pool, spa, or special use pool at the same facility
as the first pool: $75 + current state fee.
(Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-16-2017)
§ 276.08  BIRTH AND DEATH CERTIFICATE FEES.
   The following birth and death certificate fees are hereby adopted:
   (a)   Birth certificate: $25.
   (b)   Death certificate: $25.
(Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-16-2017)
§ 276.09  SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM FEES.
   The following sewage treatment system fees are hereby adopted:
   (a)   Application for site review: $55 + current state fee.
   (b)   Application for soil evaluation: $55 + current state fee.
   (c)   Application for design: $55 + current state fee.
   (d)   Permit for new or replacement installation: $115 + current state fee.
   (e)   Permit for alteration of existing system: $75 + current state fee.
   (f)   Operational permit: $75 + current state fee.
   (g)   Registration of installer: $55 + current state fee.
   (h)   Registration of service provider: $55 + current state fee.
   (i)   Registration of septage hauler: $15 + current state fee.
   (j)   Septage hauler truck: $15 + current state fee.
   (k)   Additional inspection: $55 + current state fee.
   (l)   Abandonment of system: $10 + current state fee.
   (m)   Variance: $75 + current state fee.
   (n)   Effluent sample: $115 + current state fee.
   (o)   Review of subdivision or lots: $150 + current state fee.
   (p)   Late penalty: 25% of local fee.
(Ord. 25-2017, passed 10-16-2017)
§ 276.10  HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   Establishment; membership; compensation. There is hereby established a
Health Department Advisory Board, which shall consist of the following six
members: Mayor, Health Commissioner, one individual representing healthcare,
one individual representing environmental health services, and two individuals
representing the community at-large. All members shall be appointed by the
Mayor and subject to confirmation by Council. Members shall be qualified by
their education and/or experience in public health, healthcare, environmental
health, community service, concern for the city's welfare, and/or other
criteria as determined by the Mayor. Members of the Health Department Advisory
Board shall serve faithfully, honestly, impartially, voluntarily, and without
compensation.
   (b)   Terms of service; vacancies. The term of office shall be three years,
except that of the Mayor and Health Commissioner. The Mayor and Health
Commissioner are permanent positions on the Board and shall be filled by the
individuals currently holding each position. In the event that a vacancy occurs
during the term of any member, the Mayor shall appoint a successor to fulfill
the unexpired portion of the term.
   (c)   Powers and duties. The Health Department Advisory Board is a standing
board formed to obtain community input and engage stakeholders in services
provided by the Health Department. The Board shall have the power to study,
investigate, advise, report, and recommend to the Mayor any action, program, or
plan which the Board finds advisable for the city's Public Health Department.
The Board shall have no legal responsibilities and is formed to give advice and
recommendations to the Health Department. It cannot compel the Mayor or Health
Department staff to act on its recommendations or feedback.
   (d)   Officers; rules, quorum; report. The Mayor shall serve as Chair of the
Health Department Advisory Board and will designate a Health Department
employee to serve as Secretary. The Secretary shall be responsible for sending
meeting notices, preparing meeting minutes, and communicating with the Board at
the Mayor's direction. The Board shall meet quarterly. A majority of members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All findings,
advice, reports, and recommendations of the Board shall be made in writing and
shall designate by name those members of the Board approving or concurring
therein. Members who do not approve or concur therein shall have the right, as
part of the Board's report, to state their reason for disagreement.
(Ord. 28-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
CHAPTER 278:  BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
278.01   Establishment; membership
   
278.02   Functions regarding parks
   
278.03   Organization; officers; rules; meetings; powers and duties
   
278.04   Designation of parks and parkways
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Transportation Plan, see Part Twelve, Title 4, Subdivisions
Appx. VI
   Parks generally, see
Ch. 1062
   Parks in subdivisions, see §
1248.04
   President to be member of Planning Commission, see Charter §
100
Statutory reference:
   Land appropriation for parks, see R.C. §§ 715.21, 719.01
   Parks and playgrounds, see R.C. Ch. 755
§ 278.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Board of Park Commissioners for the
city, to consist of: one resident elector from each ward of the city and one
resident elector at-large. Such resident electors shall be appointed by the
Mayor, and each such appointment must be confirmed and approved by Council
before any such appointee shall be permitted to serve as a Board member. Board
members shall serve without compensation for a term of four years and until
their successors are appointed and qualified. The ward members shall,
originally and in the first instance, be appointed to serve one year, two
years, three years and four years, respectively, and thereafter their
successors shall be appointed, one member each year, to serve for four years.
The term of the at-large member shall be concurrent with the term of the Mayor.
   (b)   The incumbent members of the Board of Park Commissioners in office
upon the effective date of this section shall remain in office until the
expiration of their terms.
(Ord. 8-59, passed 2-16-1959; Ord. 14-2012, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 278.02  FUNCTIONS REGARDING PARKS.
   The Board of Park Commissioners shall have the entire management and control
of all parks and parkways of the city that it now has or may hereafter acquire
by gift, devise, bequest or purchase; of all improvements of every nature
within such parks or parkways; and of all moneys derived from levies, sales of
bonds or donations, for park purposes. All moneys shall be disbursed by the
Director of Finance and Public Record only upon an order drawn by such Board.
(Ord. 8-59, passed 2-16-1959)
§ 278.03  ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; RULES; MEETINGS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Park Commissioners shall organize, elect its President, Vice-
President and Secretary, make such rules and regulations and hold such meetings
as it may determine and possess all the powers and exercise all the duties set
forth in R.C. §§ 755.19 through 755.34.
(Ord. 8-59, passed 2-16-1959)
§ 278.04  DESIGNATION OF PARKS AND PARKWAYS.
   The following properties are hereby designated as parks and parkways: the
properties commonly known as Seltzer Park (Permanent Parcel Numbers 046-08-500-
13-000, 046-08-500-23-000, 046-08-500-15-000, 046-08-500-20-000, and 046-05-
500-14-000), Rabold Park (Permanent Parcel Numbers 046-08-500-93-000 and 046-
08-500-81-000), Veterans Park (Permanent Parcel Number 046-08-500-08-000 and
the median of West Park Drive); McBride Park (Permanent Parcel Number 046-08-
501-40-000), Easterling Park (Permanent Parcel Number 046-08-500-07-000) Tucker
Avenue Park (Permanent Parcel Numbers 046-08-501-20-000 and 046-08-140-02-000);
the land on Blackfork Street (Permanent Parcel Numbers 046-08-095-14-000, 046-
08-089-17-000, 046-08-201-13-000, 046-08-140-07-000, 046-08-091-02-000, 046-08-
012-08-000, 046-08-132-13-000, 046-08-131-20-000, 046-08-033-12-000, 046-08-
060-18-000, 046-08-135-18-000, 046-08-153-14-000, 046-08-022-18-000, 046-08-
500-03-000, 046-08-018-07-000, 046-08-019-40-000, 046-08-018-08-000, 046-08-
500-02-000, 046-08-500-76-000, 046-08-500-75-000, 046-08-501-37-000, and 046-
08-185-15-000), the medians on Grand Boulevard and Williams Court; the land on
West Main Street (Permanent Parcel Number 0460818609000).
(Ord. 15-2010, passed 8-2-2010; Ord. 17-2016, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. 18-2017,
passed 8-7-2017)
CHAPTER 282:  SHADE TREE COMMISSION
Section
   
282.01   Establishment; membership
   
282.02   Terms of office; vacancies
   
282.03   Compensation
   
282.04   Powers and duties
   
282.05   Officers; rules; quorum; reports
   
282.06   Shade Tree Trust Fund
Cross-reference:
   Damaging vegetation on reservoir property, see §
1064.06
   Injuring of vegetation, see §
642.04
   Interference with flowers and trees in public parks, see §
1062.04
   Maintenance of vegetation, see §
1490.14
   Street trees, see
Ch. 1026
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, see R.C. § 727.011
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, see R.C. § 715.20
§ 282.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established a Shade Tree Commission for the city, to consist
of the following seven members: the Superintendent of Electric Distribution;
the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers; a member of Council to be appointed
by the Mayor; and four persons, citizens and residents of the city, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor. One of the four resident citizens shall be chosen
from each ward of the city.
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 282.02  TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The terms of office of the four persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall
be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the
first Shade Tree Commission shall be only one and two years, respectively. In
the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 282.03  COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Shade Tree Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 282.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power to study, investigate, plan,
advise, report and recommend to Council or the Mayor any action, program, plan
or legislation which the Commission finds or determines to be necessary or
advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys.
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 282.05  OFFICERS; RULES; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   The Shade Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings,
advice, reports and recommendations made by the Commission shall be in writing
and shall designate by name those members of the Commission approving or
concurring therein. Members who do not approve or concur therein shall have the
right, as a part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing to approve
or concur.
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 282.06  SHADE TREE TRUST FUND.
   (a)   A fund to be known as "The Shade Tree Trust Fund" is hereby created
for the purpose of collecting, depositing and accounting for all gifts received
and moneys expended for the purpose of planting, maintaining, removing,
protecting and promoting shade trees in accordance with the decision and
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
   (b)   The Director of Finance and Public Record shall make payments from the
Fund upon the presentation of vouchers or orders therefor from the Shade Tree
Commission.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to accept on behalf of
the city all gifts, money or other things or items of value for the purpose of
planting, maintaining, removing, protecting and promoting shade trees in
accordance with the decision and approval of the Shade Tree Commission;
however, a gift given expressly for a specific purpose shall, before the city
shall be deemed to have accepted it, be accepted by a motion and vote of the
Shade Tree Commission, and if the motion to accept is rejected by the
Commission, then the gift, if already delivered to the city, shall be returned
to the donor and not accepted.
(Res. 3-85, passed 1-21-1985)
CHAPTER 284:  FAIR HOUSING BOARD
Section
   
284.01   Establishment; membership
Cross-reference:
   Equal employment opportunity, see §
260.03
   Equal employment program, see §
230.01
   Fair housing, see
Ch. 628
   Interfering with civil rights, see §§
608.13,
636.20
Statutory reference:
   Fair housing, see R.C. Ch. 4112
§ 284.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Fair Housing Board for the city, to
consist of three residents of the city, each to serve a three-year term.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to appoint, subject to a
motion of ratification by Council, three members to serve on such Board for a
term of three years, except for the original year of appointment, so that the
terms of all members will not expire on the same date.
      (1)   The first person to be appointed shall serve for a period of three
years from March 1, 1979, to February 28, 1982, and his or her replacement or
successor shall serve for a three-year term after the date of termination.
      (2)   The second person appointed shall serve initially for two years
from March 1, 1979, to February 28, 1981, and his or her successor or
replacement shall serve for a full three years thereafter.
      (3)   The third person appointed shall serve initially for one year from
March 1, 1979, to February 29, 1980, and his or her successor or replacement
shall serve for three years thereafter.
   (c)   The Board shall be known as the Shelby Fair Housing Board and shall
meet from time to time as may be necessary.
   (d)   The first person appointed shall serve as Chairperson of the Board.
(Ord. 1-79, passed 2-5-1979)
CHAPTER 286:  HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section
   
286.01   Establishment; membership
   
286.02   Terms of office; vacancies
   
286.03   Compensation
   
286.04   Powers and duties
   
286.05   Officers; rules; quorum; reports
Cross-reference:
   Condominiums, see §
1250.08
   Exterior property maintenance, see
Ch. 1490
   Fair housing, see
Ch. 628
   Intimidation in connection with housing, see §
636.21
   Location and care of barns, coops, pens or barnyard in proximity to
residences and businesses, see §
618.18
   Use of trailers as dwellings, see §
1492.03
Statutory reference:
   Fair housing, see R.C. Ch. 4112
§ 286.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established a Housing Advisory Committee for the city, to
consist of the following seven members:  a member of Council as designated by
the Mayor; representatives from the Richland County Department of Jobs and
Family Services, the Salvation Army, the Shelby Help Line and a lending
institution which finances the transfer/sale of real estate; and two residents
of the city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 41-2000, passed 9-18-2000)
§ 286.02  TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The terms of office of the two persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be
three years.  In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member,
his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of such term.
(Ord. 28-94, passed 11-21-1994)
§ 286.03  COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Housing Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 28-94, passed 11-21-1994)
§ 286.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Housing Advisory Committee shall have the power to study, investigate
and examine the housing needs of the citizens of the city and to report, advise
and recommend to Council a Community Housing Improvement Strategy (CHIS).
(Ord. 28-94, passed 11-21-1994)
§ 286.05  OFFICERS; RULES; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   The Housing Advisory Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of its
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.  All plans,
findings, advice, reports and recommendations made by the Committee shall be in
writing and shall designate by name those members of the Committee approving or
concurring therein.  Members who do not approve or concur therein shall have
the right, as a part of the report, to state their reasons for refusing to
approve or concur.
(Ord. 28-94, passed 11-21-1994)
CHAPTER 289:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT COMMISSION
Section
   
289.01   Establishment and membership
   
289.02   Terms of office
   
289.03   Powers and duties
   
289.04   Officers; rules; quorum; reports
§ 289.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established a Floodplain Management Commission, which shall
consist of the following nine members: one member from each of the four wards
and three at-large members who may be nonresidents of the city, one
representative of The Friends of the Black Fork and one representative of The
Green Committee. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and subject to
confirmation by Council. Members shall be qualified by their education and/or
life experience, community service, concern for the city's welfare, and/or
other such criteria as determined by the Mayor. Members of the Floodplain
Management Commission shall serve faithfully, honestly and impartially and
without compensation.
(Ord. 20-2009, passed 6-15-2009)
§ 289.02  TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office shall be four years, except that terms of the ward
members appointed to the first Floodplain Management Commission shall end on
December 31, 2009, for the Ward One member; December 31, 2010, for the Ward Two
member; December 31, 2011, for the Ward Three member; and December 31, 2012,
for the Ward Four member. The terms of the at-large members, the representative
of The Friends of the Black Fork, and the representative of The Green Committee
shall be concurrent with the term of the Mayor. In the event that a vacancy
occurs during the term of any member, the successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of such term.
(Ord. 20-2009, passed 6-15-2009)
§ 289.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Floodplain Management Commission shall have the power to call in
experts, study, investigate, plan, advise, report and recommend to City Council
or to the Mayor any action, program, plan, or legislation which the Commission
finds or determines to be necessary or advisable for flood control strategies,
flood proofing recommendations, healthy stream management, riverbank
stabilization, or any issues having to do with floodplain management policies.
The Commission shall receive direction for projects from the Council or the
Mayor.
(Ord. 20-2009, passed 6-15-2009)
§ 289.04  OFFICERS; RULES; QUORUM; REPORTS.
   The Floodplain Management Commission shall choose its own officers, make its
own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. It shall meet
as often as necessary in order to accomplish its duties. A majority of its
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings,
advice, reports and recommendations made by the Commission shall be in writing
and shall designate by name those members of the Commission approving or
concurring therein. Members who do not approve or concur therein shall have the
rights, as part of the report, to state their reasons for refusing to approve
or concur.
(Ord. 20-2009, passed 6-15-2009)
CHAPTER 290:  BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS COMMISSION
Section
   
290.01   Establishment; membership; compensation
   
290.02   Terms of office; vacancies
   
290.03   Powers and duties
   
290.04   Officers; rules; quorum; report
§ 290.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.
   There is hereby established a Buildings and Grounds Commission, which shall
consist of the following seven members: one member from each of the four wards
and three at-large members who may be nonresidents of the city. All members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and subject to confirmation by Council. Members
shall be qualified by their education and/or experience in real estate,
construction, community service, concern for the city's welfare and/or other
such criteria as determined by the Mayor. Members of the Buildings and Grounds
Commission shall serve faithfully, honestly and impartially and without
compensation.
(Ord. 1-2008, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 290.02  TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The term of office shall be four years, except that terms of the ward
members appointed to the first Buildings and Grounds Commission shall end on
December 31, 2008, for the Ward One member; December 31, 2009, for the Ward Two
member; December 31, 2010, for the Ward Three member; and December 31, 2011,
for the Ward Four member. The term of the at-large members shall be concurrent
with the term of the Mayor. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term
of any member, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of
the term.
(Ord. 1-2008, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 290.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Buildings and Grounds Commission shall have the power to study,
investigate, plan, advise, report and recommend to City Council or to the Mayor
any action, program, plan or legislation which the Commission finds or
determines to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, repair,
rehabilitation, replacement, demolition or construction of the buildings and
grounds titled to and under the control of the city. The Commission shall
receive direction for projects from the Council or the Mayor.
(Ord. 1-2008, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 290.04  OFFICERS; RULES; QUORUM; REPORT.
   The Buildings and Grounds Commission shall choose its own officers,
provided, however, that the Director of Finance and Public Record, pursuant to
§
38 of the Charter of the city, shall be its secretary; make its own rules and
regulations; and keep a journal of its proceedings. It shall meet as often as
necessary in order to accomplish its duties. A majority of its members shall be
a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings, advice, reports
and recommendations made by the Commission shall be in writing and shall
designate by name those members of the Commission approving or concurring
therein. Members who do not approve or concur therein shall have the rights, as
a part of such report to state their reasons for refusing to approve or concur.
(Ord. 1-2008, passed 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 292:  RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
   
292.01   Establishment; membership; powers and duties
   
292.02   (Reserved)
Cross-reference:
   Calendar year method of keeping records, see §
260.18
   Penalty, see §
202.99
   Photocopy and certification fees, see §
202.04
   Records of the Board of Zoning Appeals, see §
1264.04
   Records of the City Planning Commission, see §
1220.02
   Records of the Traffic Commission, see §
406.07
   Tampering with records, see §
672.15
Statutory reference:
   Municipal records commissions, see R.C. § 149.39
   Only necessary records to be made, see R.C. § 149.40
   Prohibition against destruction or damage of records, see R.C. § 149.351
§ 292.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Records Commission for the city, to
consist of the Mayor or his or her appointed representative as Chairperson, the
Director of Law, the Director of Finance and Public Record and a citizen
appointed by the Mayor.
   (b)   The Records Commission shall possess all the powers and exercise all
the duties set forth in R.C. §§ 149.39 et seq.
(Ord. 43-86, passed 1-19-1987)
§ 292.02  (RESERVED)
TITLE TEN - JUDICIARY
      Chapter
         
298.   MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER 298:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Editor's note:
   The Shelby Municipal Court is established by R.C. § 1901.01.  R.C. § 1901.02
provides that the jurisdiction of the Court, in addition to the City of Shelby,
extends to Sharon, Jackson, Cass, Plymouth, Blooming Grove and Butler
Townships, except §§ 35-36-31 and 32 of Butler Township, in Richland County.
Section
   
298.01   Capital Improvements Fund
Cross-references:
   Suspension or revocation of driver's license, see §§
408.03, 698.07
   Using sham legal process, see §§
608.145
Statutory reference:
   Bond for bailiff, see R.C. § 1901.32(A)
   Bond for Court Clerk required, see R.C. § 1901.31(D)
   Juvenile Court jurisdiction; arrest of child, see R.C. §§ 2151.01, 2151.23,
2152.03, and 2152.12
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions, see R.C. § 4301.991
   Power to establish schedule of fees and costs, see R.C. § 1901.26
   Record of traffic violations, see R.C. § 4513.37
   Release of Court Clerk's liability for loss of funds, see R.C. §§ 131.18 et
seq.
§ 298.01  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND.
   (a)   The Director of Finance and Public Record is hereby authorized to
establish and maintain a Municipal Court Capital Improvements Fund and to do
all things necessary and proper to manage the moneys in the Fund consistent
with the provisions of the Fund, including the receipt, investment,
reinvestment and disbursement of the moneys.
   (b)   Moneys collected by the Shelby Municipal Court and paid to the city
from a fee assessed by the Court shall be paid into the Municipal Court Capital
Improvements Fund, which Fund shall be used to provide for the capital needs of
the Court, including maintenance of capital improvements and training of
personnel to operate the same.
(Ord. 13-91, passed 5-6-1991)
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC
TITLE TWO - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
      Chapter
         
402.   DEFINITIONS
         
404.   ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
         
406.   TRAFFIC CONTROL
         
408.   PENALTIES
CHAPTER 402:  DEFINITIONS
Section
   
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases
Cross-reference:
   Blind person defined, see §
416.02
   Commercial car defined, see §
442.01
   Funeral procession defined, see §
432.23
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined, see §
446.01
   Street racing defined, see §
434.09
§ 402.01  MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this traffic code and the penal laws of the municipality. Except
as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when used in this
traffic code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
chapter.
   (a)   "Agricultural tractor." Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   (b)   "Alley." A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an "alley" by the legislative authority of the municipality in which the street
or highway is located.
   (c)   "Arterial street." Any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   (d)   "Bicycle." Every device, other than a tricycle designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, propelled solely by human power, upon which any
person may ride having two tandem wheels, or one wheel in the front and two
wheels in the rear, or two wheels in the front and one wheel in the rear, any
of which is more than 14 inches in diameter.
   (e)   "Bus." Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
   (f)   "Business district." The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (g)   "Chauffeured limousine." A motor vehicle that is designed to carry
nine or fewer passengers and is operated for hire on an hourly basis pursuant
to a prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads
and highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle
and not over a defined and regular route. "Prearranged contract" means an
agreement, made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a
specific location in an chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour or trip.
"Chauffeured limousine" does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively
in the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   (h)   "Child day-care center" and "type A family day-care home." These terms
shall have the same meanings as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   (i)   "Commercial tractor." Every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   (j)   "Controlled-access highway." Every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.
   (i)   "Crosswalk."
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a "crosswalk" where the legislative authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   (j)   "Driver" or "operator." Any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
   (k)   "Emergency vehicle." Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor
vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
   (l)   "Explosives." Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
"explosives" when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of a nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous
or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life, limb or
property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by a detonator, such as
fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
   (m)   "Expressway." A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.
   (n)   "Flammable liquid." Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or
less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   (o)   "Freeway." A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
   (p)   "Funeral escort vehicle." Any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   (q)   "Gross weight." The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
   (r)   "Intersection."
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If an intersecting
highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing
of two roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway, or with another
alley, shall not constitute an intersection.
   (s)   "Laned highway." A highway, the roadway of which is divided into two
or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   (t)   "Local authorities." Every county, municipal and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.
   (u)   "Motor vehicle." Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes
and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed for or employed
in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling
machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
   (v)   "Motorcycle." Every motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as "motor-driven cycle", "motor scooter" or "motorcycle" without
regard to weight or brake horsepower.
   (w)   "Motorized bicycle." Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that is capable of being
pedaled, and is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement which produces no more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater
than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.
   (x)   "Motorized wheelchair." Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
   (y)   "Multi-wheel agricultural tractor." A type of agricultural tractor
that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of
the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   (z)   "Operate." To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   (aa)   "Parking" or "parked." The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.
(1996 Code, § 402.26)
   (bb)   "Pedestrian." Any natural person afoot.
   (cc)   "Person." Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
   (dd)   "Pole trailer." Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   (ee)   "Police officer." Every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   (ff)   "Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense." Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, § 4511.051, § 4511.12, § 4511.132, §
4511.16, § 4511.20, § 4511.201, § 4511.21, § 4511.211, § 4511.213, § 4511.22, §
4511.23, § 4511.25, § 4511.26, § 4511.27, § 4511.28, § 4511.29, § 4511.30, §
4511.31, § 4511.32, § 4511.33, § 4511.34, § 4511.35, § 4511.36, § 4511.37, §
4511.38, § 4511.39, § 4511.40, § 4511.41, § 4511.42, § 4511.43, § 4511.431, §
4511.432, § 4511.44, § 4511.441, § 4511.451, § 4511.452, § 4511.46, § 4511.47,
§ 4511.48, § 4511.481, § 4511.49, § 4511.50, § 4511.511, § 4511.53, § 4511.54,
§ 4511.55, § 4511.56, § 4511.57, § 4511.58, § 4511.59, § 4511.60, § 4511.61, §
4511.64, § 4511.66, § 4511.661, § 4511.68, § 4511.70, § 4511.701, § 4511.71, §
4511.711, § 4511.712, § 4511.713, § 4511.72, § 4511.73, § 4511.763,  §
4511.771, § 4511.78 or § 4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), § 4511.51(A) through (D) or §
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2) or (3) of this definition.
   (gg)   "Private road or driveway." Every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   (hh)   "Public safety vehicle." Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a "public safety vehicle", shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether the vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   (ii)   "Railroad." A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
   (jj)   "Railroad sign or signal." Any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   (kk)   "Railroad train." A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with
or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   (ll)   "Residence district." The territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
   (mm)   "Ridesharing arrangement." Includes the transportation of persons in
a motor vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes "ridesharing arrangements" known as carpools,
vanpools and buspools.
   (nn)   "Right-of-way." Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, "right-of-way" includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   (oo)   "Road service vehicle."  Wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
   (pp)   "Roadway." That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
   (qq)   "Rural mail delivery vehicle." Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   (rr)   "Safety zone." The area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or
indicated by adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   (ss)   "School bus." Every bus designed for carrying more than nine
passengers which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or
institution of learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or
from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and
operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a
school session or a school function; provided, "school bus" does not include a
bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit
company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality,
or within those limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately
contiguous to the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the
Public Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and "school bus" does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   (tt)   "Semitrailer." Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
   (uu)   "Sidewalk." That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
   (vv)   "State highway." A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and § 4511.99.
   (ww)   "State route." Every highway which is designated with an official
state route number and so marked.
   (xx)   "Stop." When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
(1996 Code, § 402.45)
   (yy)   "Stop intersection." Any intersection at one or more entrances of
which stop signs are erected.
   (zz)   "Stopping" or "standing." When prohibited, means any halting of a
vehicle, even momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control device.
(1996 Code, § 402.47)
   (aaa)   "Street" or "highway." The entire width between the boundary lines
of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   (bbb)   "Through highway." Every street or highway as provided in R.C. §
4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (ccc)   "Thruway." A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for
through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   (ddd)   "Traffic." Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
devices, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   (eee)   "Traffic-control devices." All flagpersons, signs, signals, markings
and devices placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic,
including signs denoting names of streets and highways.
   (fff)   "Traffic-control signal." Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop, to
proceed, to change direction or not to change direction.
   (ggg)   "Trailer." Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
   (hhh)   "Truck." Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
   (iii)   "Urban district." The territory contiguous to and including any
street or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business,
industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a
distance of one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory
is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (jjj)   "Vehicle." Every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or
by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except that "vehicle" does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric
personal assistive mobility device, any device that is moved by power collected
from overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved
by human power.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
CHAPTER 404:  ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
   
404.01   Police may remove ignition key
   
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official
   
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted
   
404.04   Emergency, public safety and coroners' vehicles excepted
   
404.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway
   
404.06   Application to drivers of government vehicles
   
404.07   Impounding of vehicles; redemption
   
404.08   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards
   
404.09   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation
 
   
404.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Dereliction of duty, see §
608.12
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
608.16
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see §§
432.19,
434.07
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see §
608.05
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Parking violations waiver, see §
452.18
   Obstructing justice, see §
608.07
   Obstructing official business, see §
608.06
   Resisting arrest, see §
608.08
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see §
608.11
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles, see §
444.10
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see R.C. § 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see R.C. §§ 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.15
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.13
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see R.C. § 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see R.C. § 4511.08
§ 404.01  POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 404.02  RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any sheriff,
constable or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this traffic code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this traffic code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of
R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22, §
4511.25, § 4511.26, § 4511.27, § 4511.28, § 4511.30, § 4511.31, § 4511.33, §
4511.35, § 4511.66 or § 4513.02 or §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt the driver of a vehicle that is
engaged in the transport of highway maintenance equipment from criminal
liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, "highway maintenance vehicle" means a vehicle
used in snow and ice removal or road surface maintenance, including a snow
plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing
vehicle or other such vehicle designed for use in specific highway maintenance
activities.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
§ 404.04  EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS' VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.15, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver
of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 404.05  APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 404.06  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.07  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to create an
automotive vehicle pound to which automobiles and other automotive vehicles may
be removed by police officers in the manner hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in R.C. § 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving the vehicle in the
place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this traffic code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to the citation tags as lawfully required.
   (c)   A reasonable fee to cover the cost of removal, in addition to a
reasonable storage fee for each day or fraction of a day any impounded vehicle
is stored, shall be assessed against the owner or any other person claiming the
impounded vehicle.
   (d)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(2) of this section
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under R.C. §§
4513.60 et seq.  Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section
shall be ordered into storage and the Police Department shall forthwith notify
the registered vehicle owner of the fact of the removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded
vehicle shall appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence
of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a
release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which the vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to the violations. The pound operator shall release the vehicle upon
the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges.
   (e)   In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or
storage fee, the police officer or person in charge of the impounded vehicle,
upon satisfactory evidence of the identity and ownership of the person claiming
the impounded vehicle, and upon the furnishing of a bond in an amount as set by
rule of court by the owner or driver of the vehicle, to the satisfaction of the
Clerk of Courts, conditioned upon the owner or driver appearing before the
court to answer to the violation on account of which the vehicle had been
impounded, shall surrender the impounded vehicle to the claimant, and it shall
thereupon be the duty of the police officer having knowledge of the facts
forthwith to institute the proper proceedings in the court, charging the owner
or driver of the vehicle with the violation for which the vehicle was
impounded.
   (f)   Vehicles impounded pursuant to this section which are unclaimed shall
be disposed of pursuant to R.C. §§ 737.32 et seq. or § 4513.62.
   (g)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
(Ord. 67-57, passed 12-16-1957; Ord. 7-74, passed 2-4-1974; Ord. 4-81, passed
1-5-1981)
§ 404.08  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this traffic code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.09  FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 404.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 406:  TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
   
406.01   Establishment of Traffic Commission; membership; Chairperson
   
406.02   Authority and considerations for placement of devices
   
406.03   Conformity with State Manual
   
406.04   Powers of the Traffic Commission
   
406.05   Posting of signs and signals required
   
406.06   Commission's powers not limited
   
406.07   Records of the Traffic Commission
   
406.08   Reservation of power to Council
   
406.09   Violations subject to general code penalty
Cross-reference:
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see §
414.02
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.01
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see R.C.
§ 4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway, see R.C. §
4511.011
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings, see R.C. § 4511.61
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 406.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION; MEMBERSHIP; CHAIRPERSON.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Traffic Commission to
serve without compensation, consisting of the Mayor, the Chief of Police, the
Chief of the Fire Department, the Project Coordinator, the Superintendent of
Electric Distribution, the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers, the Deputy
Director of Public Service and Utilities, and one member of Council.  The
Chairperson of the Commission shall be the Mayor.
(Ord. 53-99, passed 10-18-1999; Ord. 6-2006, passed 4-3-2006)
§ 406.02  AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic-
control devices upon any street or highway under its jurisdiction as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this traffic code, or to regulate,
warn or guide traffic, and such other traffic-control devices as the person
shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The Commission shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of the traffic-control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (e)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (f)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
(Ord. 9-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 406.03  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
traffic code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
(Ord. 7-74, passed 2-4-1974)
§ 406.04  POWERS OF THE TRAFFIC COMMISSION.
   The Traffic Commission is hereby empowered to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of the zones.  The zones may be marked by an
auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal centerline
or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic-control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect "No U Turn" signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations; and
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
(Ord. 9-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 406.05  POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 7-74, passed 2-4-1974)
§ 406.06  COMMISSION'S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the Traffic Commission shall not be limited by the specific
enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 9-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 406.07  RECORDS OF THE TRAFFIC COMMISSION.
   The Traffic Commission shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and
proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
(Ord. 9-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 406.08  RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the Traffic Commission and may assume any of the powers delegated
to the Traffic Commission, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of
the members duly elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the
same may be changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by
Council.
(Ord. 9-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 406.09  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   No person shall violate any of the rules and regulations promulgated in
connection with this chapter.  Whoever violates this section shall be subject
to the penalties provided in
Chapter 408.
(Ord. 7-74, passed 2-4-1974)
CHAPTER 408:  PENALTIES
Section
   
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
408.02   General code penalty
   
408.03   Suspension of driver's license
Cross-reference:
   Definition of "dangerous offender", see §
698.01
   Definition of "repeat offender", see §
698.01
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
698.03
   Multiple sentences, see §
698.05
   Organizational penalties, see §
698.04
Statutory reference:
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of "imprisoned", see R.C. § 1.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
§ 408.01  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02  GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) or (c) of this section, a
minor misdemeanor;
   (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
   (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
§ 408.03  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this traffic code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this traffic code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this traffic code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR - PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      Chapter
         
412.   OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
         
414.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
         
416.   PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 412:  OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
   
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street
   
412.02   Zones of quiet
   
412.03   Play streets
   
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway
   
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals
   
412.06   Ball playing
   
412.07   Parades and assemblages
 
   
412.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see §
452.12
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see §
452.09
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see R.C. § 4511.07
§ 412.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   No person shall place or allow to exist any foreign material or
substance, either directly or indirectly, on any public street, alley or
thoroughfare in the city.  In addition to the owner and or developer of any
project, any person responsible for the creation of the above described
undesirable situation shall be jointly and severally liable for a violation of
this division.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates  division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a) or (c) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 27-81, passed 11-16-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4511.74
§ 412.02  ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03  PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04  TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   (a)   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing
a street or crosswalk, except such streets as the Chief of Police ropes off for
the use of the toy vehicles.
   (b)   No person shall use a sidewalk surfboard or other coaster vehicle
incapable of steering, except by balance or shifting of weight, on public
streets and alleys within the city or on sidewalks in the business district of
the city.
(Ord. 247, passed 10-20-1930; Ord. 14-65, passed 4-19-1965)
§ 412.05  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals,
a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor
which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor or
farm machinery, except in the performance of public works or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.06  BALL PLAYING.
   No person shall play at any game of ball or throw or toss a ball in any of
the streets and alleys of the city.
(1923 Code, § 176)
§ 412.07  PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (a)   No person shall conduct or participate in any parade, assemblage or
processing, other than a funeral procession, upon any street or highway, or
block of any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Police Chief.
   (b)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.  Applications shall be
filed not less than 72 hours before the time intended for the parade,
procession or assemblage.  Failure to file an application 72 hours in advance
will not result in automatic denial of the permit, provided that the applicant
shows reasonable grounds why the application could not be filed 72 hours in
advance.
   (c)   The permit may be refused or cancelled if:
      (1)   The time, place, size or conduct of the parade, including the
assembly areas and route of march, would unreasonably interfere with the public
convenience and safe use of the streets and highways;
      (2)   The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and
areas contiguous thereto as to deny normal police protection to the
municipality;
      (3)   The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably
interfere with the movement of police vehicles, firefighting equipment or
ambulance service to other areas of the municipality;
      (4)   The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for
which a permit has been issued;
      (5)   The information contained in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail; or
      (6)   An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper
conduct of the parade.
   (d)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the place of assembly and of
dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
(1986 Code, § 311.02)
§ 412.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
414.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs
   
414.03   Traffic-control signal terms and lights
   
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel
   
414.05   Pedestrian control signals
   
414.06   Flashing traffic signals
   
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising
   
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices
   
414.09   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
414.10   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
414.11   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices
 
   
414.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices, see §
406.02
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.09
   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction, see §
432.16
   Posting of signs and signals required, see §
406.05
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.01
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see §
406.03
Statutory reference:
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see R.C. §§ 4511.07,
4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 414.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, "commercial motor vehicle" means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at all
intersections with such through highways by the Department of Transportation as
to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities as to highways
under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where
two or more state routes that are through highways intersect, and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Whenever the
Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a
through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent the installations. When circumstances warrant, the
Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways
under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or removes a
stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that
proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate the street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting the through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 414.03  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying words or symbols, and these lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
      (1)   Green indication.
         A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at the place prohibits
either turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited.
         B.   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. The vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         C.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
      (2)   Steady yellow indication.
         A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in
R.C. § 4511.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red
indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
      (3)   Steady red indication.
         A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the
intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown
except as provided in divisions (a)(3)B. and (a)(3)C. of this section.
         B.   Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a right turn as provided in
division (a)(3)E. of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal
may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping as
required by division (a)(3)A. of this section. This vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and
to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         C.   Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a left turn as provided in
division (a)(3)E. of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal
on a one-way street that intersects another one-way street on which traffic
moves to the left may cautiously enter the intersection to make a left turn
into the one-way street after stopping as required by division (a)(3)A. of this
section, and yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         D.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
         E.   Local authorities may by ordinance, or the Director of
Transportation on state highways may, prohibit a right or a left turn against a
steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (b)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but, in the absence of
any sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 414.04  SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   When lane-use control signals are placed over individual lanes of a street
or highway, these signals shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles as
follows:
   (a)   A steady (downward) green arrow. Vehicular traffic may travel in any
lane over which a green arrow signal is shown.
   (b)   A steady yellow "X". Vehicular traffic is warned to vacate in a safe
manner any lane over which the signal is shown to avoid occupying that lane
when a steady red "X" signal is shown.
   (c)   A flashing yellow "X". Vehicular traffic may use with proper caution
any lane over which this signal is shown for only the purpose of making a left
turn.
   (d)   A steady red "X". Vehicular traffic shall not enter or travel in any
lane over which this signal is shown.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 414.05  PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or
"don't walk", or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   "Walk" or the symbol of a walking person. Pedestrians facing this
signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall
be given the right-of-way by the operators of all vehicles.
   (b)   "Don't walk" or the symbol of an upraised palm. No pedestrian shall
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal.
   (c)   "Wait". Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
continued use of pedestrian-control signals utilizing the word "wait" if those
signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 414.06  FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (a)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow traffic signal is used
in a traffic signal or with a traffic sign, it shall require obedience as
follows:
      (1)   Flashing red stop signal. Operators of vehicles shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow caution signal. Operators of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (b)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62, or substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
(R.C. § 4511.15)
§ 414.07  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 414.08  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 414.09  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "traffic-control device" means any sign,
traffic-control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual's employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual's employment by any manufacturer of
traffic-control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 414.10  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14) or (A)(19);
      (2)   A State Highway Patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3) or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, "portable signal preemption device" means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 414.11  TRAFFIC LAW PHOTO-MONITORING DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "traffic law photo-monitoring device" means
an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera
and a means of sensing the presence of a motor vehicle that automatically
produces photographs, videotape or digital images of the vehicle or its license
plate.
   (b)   (1)   The municipality shall not use traffic law photo-monitoring
devices to enforce any traffic law until after it has erected signs on every
highway that is not a freeway that is part of the state highway system and that
enters the municipality. The signs shall inform inbound traffic that the
municipality utilizes traffic law photo-monitoring devices to enforce traffic
laws. The signs shall be erected within the first 300 feet of the boundary of
the municipality or, if the signs cannot be located within the first 300 feet
of the boundary of the municipality, as close to that distance as possible,
provided that if a particular highway enters and exits the territory of the
municipality multiple times, the municipality shall erect the signs as required
by this division at the locations in each direction of travel where inbound
traffic on the highway first enters the territory of the municipality and is
not required to erect additional signs along the highway each time the highway
reenters the territory of the municipality. The municipality is responsible for
all costs associated with the erection, maintenance and replacement, if
necessary, of the signs. All signs erected under this division shall conform in
size, color, location and content to standards contained in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09 and shall remain
in place for as long as the municipality utilizes traffic law photo-monitoring
devices to enforce any traffic law. Any ticket, citation or summons issued by
or on behalf of the municipality for any traffic law violation based upon
evidence gathered by a traffic law photo-monitoring device after March 12,
2009, but before the signs have been erected, is invalid; provided that no
ticket, citation or summons is invalid if the municipality is in substantial
compliance with the requirement of this division to erect the signs.
      (2)   The municipality is deemed to be in substantial compliance with the
requirement of division (b)(1) of this section to erect the advisory signs if
the municipality does both of the following:
         A.   First erects all signs as required by division (b)(1) of this
section and subsequently maintains and replaces the signs as needed so that at
all times at least 90% of the required signs are in place and functional;
         B.   Annually documents and upon request certifies its compliance with
division (b)(2)A. of this section.
   (c)   If the municipality uses traffic law photo-monitoring devices to
enforce any traffic law at an intersection where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals that exhibit different colored lights or colored
lighted arrows, the municipality shall time the operation of the yellow lights
and yellow arrows of those traffic-control signals so that the steady yellow
indication exceeds by one second the minimum duration for yellow indicators at
similar intersections as established by the provisions of the manual adopted by
the Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4511.094)
§ 414.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks
   
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person
   
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways
   
416.04   Moving in crosswalks
   
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets
   
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area
   
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers
   
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
416.10   Intoxication
   
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators
   
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
 
   
416.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic, see §
452.08
   Pedestrian control signals, see §
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
§ 416.01  DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if required
by R.C. § 4511.132, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section "blind person" or "blind pedestrian"
means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
§ 416.04  MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 416.05  WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 416.06  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN
CARGO STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. § 4511.051
(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be
valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in
any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (b)(2) of this section, "charitable
organization" means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 416.07  PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 416.08  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 416.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10  INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 416.11  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 416.12  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS."
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or Board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined $10;
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device's impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, "electric personal assistive mobility device"
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX - OPERATION AND VEHICLES
      Chapter
         
432.   OPERATION GENERALLY
         
434.   O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
         
436.   LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
         
438.   SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
         
440.   COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
         
442.   DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
         
444.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
         
446.   SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
CHAPTER 432:  OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
   
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
   
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
   
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver's duties
   
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle
   
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline
   
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway
   
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones
   
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic
   
432.09   Following too closely
   
432.10   Turning at intersections
   
432.11   "U" turns restricted
   
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles
   
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
   
432.14   Hand and arm signals
   
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections
   
432.16   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction
   
432.17   Right-of-way when turning left
   
432.18   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs
   
432.19   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs
   
432.20   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner's vehicle
   
432.205   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle with
flashing lights
   
432.21   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building
   
432.22   Stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
432.23   Right-of-way of funeral procession
   
432.24   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs
   
432.25   Driver's view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
   
432.26   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
   
432.27   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles
   
432.28   Driving over fire hose
   
432.29   Driving through safety zone
   
432.30   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands
   
432.31   Driving upon divided roadways
   
432.32   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children
   
432.33   Driving across grade crossings
   
432.34   Stopping at grade crossings
   
432.35   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings
   
432.36   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings
   
432.37   "Peeling"; cracking exhaust noises
   
432.38   Shortcutting across private property
   
432.39   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
   
432.40   Weaving; full time and attention
   
432.41   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles
   
432.42   Littering from motor vehicles
   
432.43   Use of earphones while driving
 
   
432.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see §§
444.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see §§
446.03,
446.04
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see §
416.09
§ 432.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left
turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06  DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or centerline of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of the zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08  DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of that allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11  "U" TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no vehicle shall
be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon
the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle cannot be seen
within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either
direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.37)
   (d)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no vehicle shall
be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or
upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or
controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit
that movement, or at any other location unless the movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the public way and without interfering with
the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by the movement.
§ 432.12  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not required to
be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the
bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the
operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 432.15  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.16  INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals shall do all of the following, if the
signal facing the driver either exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted
arrows or exhibits a combination of lights or arrows that fails to clearly
indicate the assignment of right-of-way:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 432.17  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 432.18  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 432.19  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 432.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER'S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4511.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, "coroner's vehicle" means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
§ 432.205  DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE WITH
FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, an emergency vehicle or a road service vehicle that is
displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating or
rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. § 4513.17, shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, an emergency vehicle or a road service
vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
an emergency vehicle or a road service vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
(R.C. § 4511.213)
§ 432.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.431(B))
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.22  STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   R.C. §§ 4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a
private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance with
division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §§
4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
conduct under this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Intersection."
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   "Owner" and "private residential area containing 20 or more
dwelling units." Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      (3)   "Roadway." That portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
"roadway" means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.432)
§ 432.23  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, "funeral procession" means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 432.24  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles, except that no local
authority may require that bicycles be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.711)
   (c)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.25  DRIVER'S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic; nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 432.26  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.71)
§ 432.27  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.72)
§ 432.28  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 432.29  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 432.30  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 432.31  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 432.32  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever, but only whenever, the bus is stopped or stopping on the
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by
head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals
or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus
is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at
buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are
loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign
shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (a) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court's action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Head start agency." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      (2)   "School bus." As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and
displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with amber
and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77, irrespective
of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any time. The term
does not include a van owned and operated by a head start agency, irrespective
of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 432.33  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 432.34  STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 185, before crossing at
grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped,
shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing,
and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   "Bus." Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   "Exempt crossing." A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   "School vehicle." Any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, § 4511.76, § 4511.761, §
4511.762, § 4511.764, § 4511.77 or § 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division
(a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks, and erect stop signs thereat. When stop signs are erected, the
operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than 15, feet from
the nearest rail of the railroad tracks, and shall exercise due care before
proceeding across the grade crossing.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 432.35  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (a)
(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.64)
§ 432.36  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 432.37  "PEELING"; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
the vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
"peeling".
§ 432.38  SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across that property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on the property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.39  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.40  WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
§ 432.41  OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of that use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director's
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A), (B))
§ 432.42  LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, "litter" means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82)
§ 432.43  USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, "earphones" means any
headset, radio, tape player or other similar device that provides the listener
with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a device
attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. "Earphones"
does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into
protective headgear.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the maintenance or repair
of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 432.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434:  O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
   
434.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs
   
434.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property
   
434.025   Careless operation on streets, public or private property
   
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead
   
434.04   Speed limits on private roads and driveways
   
434.05   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds
   
434.06   Speed limitations over bridges
   
434.07   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles
   
434.08   Reasonable control
   
434.09   Street racing prohibited
   
434.10   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter
 
   
434.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see §
442.05
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.24
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see §
612.04
   "Peeling", see §
432.37
   Weaving; full time and attention, see §
432.40
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol defined, see R.C. § 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Drug of abuse defined, see R.C. § 3719.011
§ 434.01  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's
urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.
         H   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person's
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person's urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person's
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person's urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
               b.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person's urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person's urine, in a person's whole blood, or in a person's blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person's urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the
person's blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) or (b) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person's refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn
and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02, may be
admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or
other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under R.C.
§ 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance
withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid
permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, “Emergency medical
technician-intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person's own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person's
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
"National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst's or test performer's
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst's or test performer's regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst's or test performer's education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19, §
4511.191 or § 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19, §
4511.191 or § 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), “Emergency medical technician-
intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A)-(F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   "Alcohol monitoring device."  Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person's system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person's conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   "Physical control." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent.  The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if
convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)
(1)(d) or (G)(1)(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to
submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose
of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of
a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a
request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or
tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the
person the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but the officer
shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to
take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are
necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person
at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test
taken at the person's own expense. Divisions (g)(3) and (g)(4) of this section
apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this
division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer's reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting officer
shall read the following form to the person:
      "You now are under arrest  for (specifically state the offense under
state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the
person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a
drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence).
      "If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of
O.V.I., O.V.U.A.C., or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
under state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under
arrest for state O.V.I., and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will
face increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
      (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) "If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
      "If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense."
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person's license or permit or it is not in the
person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person's initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person's refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person's Ohio driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person's initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person's arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person's license or permit or it is not in the
person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer's
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person's current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer's sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person's being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person's initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person's arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) or (b) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) or (b) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20
years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02(f) or
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section.
      (8)   As used in division (h) of this section, “electronic monitoring”
has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6);
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
or (b) of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court
imposes a jail term for the violation of division (b) of this section, the
court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant
to R.C. § 2929.24(E).
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter 3793 by the
Director of Alcohol and Drug Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court's Indigent Drivers' Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension.  If a person whose driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is
suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any
aspect of the person's trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the
operation of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional.  Division (a)(1)J. of
this section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional's directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D).  The prohibited concentrations of
a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms.  All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or § 4511.01, the
term as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G)-(M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), "physical control" means
being in the driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle's ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional's directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Community residential sanction," "continuous alcohol monitoring,"
"jail," "mandatory prison term," "mandatory term of local incarceration,"
"prison term" and "sanction." Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   "Drug of abuse." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   "Equivalent offense." Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or § 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B).
      (4)   "Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related." An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for "equivalent offense" provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).
      (5)   "Mandatory jail term." The mandatory term in jail of three, six,
ten, 20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)
(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A)
of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   "Municipal O.V.I. ordinance" and "municipal O.V.I. offense." Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers'
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mayor's Court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 434.011  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender with limited driving privileges, during any period
that the offender is required to operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
immobilizing or disabling device, shall request or permit any other person to
breathe into the device if it is an ignition interlock device or another type
of device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or to
otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of
providing the offender with an operable motor vehicle.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. of this section, no
person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device that is an
ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors the
concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to an offender with limited driving
privileges who is permitted to operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
immobilizing or disabling device.
         B.   Division (a)(2)A. of this section does not apply to a person in
the following circumstances:
            1.   The person is an offender with limited driving privileges.
            2.   The person breathes into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or otherwise starts a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
            3.   The person breathes into the device or starts the vehicle for
the purpose of providing the person with an operable motor vehicle.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 434.02  RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits the operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.025  CARELESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway without due
regard for the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property,
other than streets or highways, without due regard for the safety of persons or
property.
   (c)   Division (b) does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the owner of the property knowingly permits
the operation thereon.
(1986 Code, § 333.09)
§ 434.03  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, "school" means any school chartered
under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year
filed with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-08, a
copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils certifying
that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-
supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from
which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. "School" also
includes a special elementary school that in writing requests the County
Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of
the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that
location by erecting appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, "school zone" means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, "crosswalk" has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, "special elementary school" means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section and freeways as provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of
this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(13) and (b)(14);
      (10)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways outside the
municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on all portions of freeways
that are part of the interstate system and on all portions of freeways not part
of the interstate system, but are built to the standards and specifications
that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate system for
operators of any motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds empty weight
and any noncommercial bus, except as provided in division (b)(14) of this
section;
      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
weighing 8,000 pounds or less empty weight and any commercial bus at all times
on all portions of freeways that are part of the interstate system and that had
such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995, and freeways that are
not part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and
specifications that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate
system and that had such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995,
unless a higher speed limit is established under R.C. § 4511.21(L);
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
weighing 8,000 pounds or less empty weight and any commercial bus at all times
on all portions of the following:
         A.   Freeways that are part of the interstate system and that had such
a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995, and freeways that are not
part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and specifications
that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate system and that
had such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995;
         B.   Freeways that are part of the interstate system and freeways that
are not part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and
specifications that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate
system, and that had such a speed limit established under R.C. § 4511.21(L);
         C.   Rural, divided, multi-lane highways that are designated as part
of the national highway system under the "National Highway System Designation
Act of 1995", 109 Stat. 568, 23 U.S.C. 103, and that had such a speed limit
established under R.C. § 4511.21(M).
      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour at all times on all portions of freeways
that are part of the interstate system and that had such a speed limit on July
1, 2009 for operators of any motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds
empty weight and any noncommercial bus;
      (15)   On East Smiley Avenue east of the Jackson-Sharon township line,
the speed  limit shall be 45 miles per hour;
      (16)   On East Smiley Avenue/Road adjacent and/or contiguous to the newly
annexed acreage, the speed  limit shall be 45 miles per hour, as shall that
portion of East Smiley Avenue/Road adjacent and/or contiguous to that portion
of the Keinath Annexation which is east of the corporation limit as it is
delineated on the north side of the roadway (the corporation limit as referred
to herein as being immediately east of the Shelby Missionary and Christian
Alliance Church);
      (17)   On East Smiley Avenue/Road adjacent and/or contiguous to that
portion of the Keinath Annexation from the Sharon/Jackson Township line to that
portion of the Keinath Annexation which is east of the corporation limit on the
north side of the roadway (which corporation limit as referred to herein as
being immediately east of the Shelby Missionary and Christian Alliance Church),
the speed  limit shall be 25 miles per hour;
      (18)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on London
West Road from a point 2.52 miles east of the Richland/Crawford County Line
(also being the Shelby corporation limit) to a point 4.16 miles east of the
Richland/Crawford County Line (also being the Shelby corporation limit), shall
be 45 miles per hour;
      (19)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on
Wareham Road from a point 0.13 miles from Mansfield Avenue to a point 0.83
miles from Mansfield Avenue (also being the Shelby corporation limit), shall be
35 miles per hour;
      (20)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on
Broadway Street from the centerline of Cline Avenue to a point 2,677 feet north
of the centerline of Cline Avenue, shall be 45 miles per hour; and
      (21)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on Vernon
Road from a point 2.98 miles north of Stein Road (also being the Shelby
corporation limit) to a point 3.29 miles north of Stein Road (also being the
Shelby corporation limit), shall be 40 miles per hour.
      (22)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on East
Main Street from the centerline of Roberts Drive to a point .599 miles to the
east (eastbound) and from the centerline of Roberts Drive to a point .436 miles
to the east (westbound) shall be 45 miles per hour;
      (23)   In accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(B)(2), the speed limit on East
Main Street from a point .599 miles to the east from the centerline of Roberts
Drive to the easternmost corporation limit (eastbound) shall be 50 miles per
hour;
      (24)   The speed limit on Mickey Road between Martin Drive and South
Gamble Street shall be 35 miles per hour.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) and
(b)(8) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this section
by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to
exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No person
shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same
conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section may be
charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a freeway as
provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (3)   If operating a motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds
empty weight or a noncommercial bus as prescribed in division (b)(11) of this
section, at a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided in
that division;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a freeway for
which the Director has determined and declared a speed limit of not more than
65 miles per hour pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(L)(2) or (M);
      (5)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon a freeway for which
such a speed limit has been established through the operation of R.C. § 4511.21
(L)(3);
      (6)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a freeway for
which the Director had determined and declared a speed limit pursuant to R.C. §
4511.21(I)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima facie
lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4),
(d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section is alleged, the defendant shall be charged in
a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation indicated of both
division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of this
section, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to this section or R.C.
§ 4511.21 by the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in
division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section. If
the court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)
(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this
section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction
under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)
(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section. If it finds no violation of
division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it
shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under division
(d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Commercial bus." A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      (2)   "Interstate system." Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (3)   "Noncommercial bus." Includes but is not limited to a school bus,
or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of
that section, and operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles per hour in a
business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles per hour in other
portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles per hour in a school zone
during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the
school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
(Ord. 9-2005, passed 3-7-2005; Ord. 30-2006, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 21-2009,
passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 34-2009, passed 9-21-2009; Ord. 41-2011, passed 12-5-
2011; Ord. 30-2013, passed 8-5-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4511.21
§ 434.04  SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the Manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation
of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division (a) of this
section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Owner." Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners' association, a property
owners' association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   "Private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units."
Does not include a "Chautauqua assembly" as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty. A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2) and (f)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.211)
§ 434.05  SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or local
authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate
a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be less than 30
miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective until the
provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have
obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 434.06  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the bridge or
structure, when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 434.07  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 434.08  REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 434.09  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, "street racing" means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(8)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from
a common starting point to a speed in excess of the prima facie lawful speeds
shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street or highway in this municipality.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's license, permit or
privilege imposed under this division.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 434.10  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   A.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         C.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies only
if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated
is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the
speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in
division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license
or commercial driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault
offense. The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when
required by division (c) of this section.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, a
class three suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(3); or, if
the offender previously had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class two
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege as specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section, as
provided in R.C. § 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of
at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon
the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A. or (a)(4) of this section in
that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Construction zone." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   "Mandatory prison term" and "mandatory jail term." Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   "Motor vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   "Reckless operation offense." A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         E.   "Speeding offense." A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         F.   "Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense." A
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or § 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, § 2903.07 or § 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         G.   "Traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder
offense." A violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or § 2903.02 in circumstances in which
the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon
used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to
commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.10
§ 434.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436:  LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
   
436.01   Driver's or commercial driver's license required
   
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited
   
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit
   
436.035   Driving with probationary license
   
436.04   Certain acts prohibited
   
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
   
436.06   Display of license
   
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction;
driving under suspension for failure to appear in court, failure to pay a fine
or failure to pay child support
   
436.072   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
436.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension
   
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
436.075   Failure to reinstate license
   
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions
   
436.10   Use of illegal license plates
   
436.11   Stopping after accident upon streets; collision with unattended
vehicle
   
436.12   Stopping after accident upon property other than streets
   
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty
   
436.14   Removal of vehicles after accidents
 
   
436.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Glass removal from street after accident, see §
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator, see §
446.05
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports, see §
446.06
   Suspension of driver's license, see §§
408.03, 698.07
Statutory reference:
   Driver's license law , see R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see R.C. § 4507.321
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   State accident reports, see R.C. §§ 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
§ 436.01  DRIVER'S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this division is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03,  R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or commercial
driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or commercial
driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver's or commercial driver's license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator's endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver's permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person's active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person's  active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person's spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver's license or
motorcycle operator's endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver's license during the period of the person's
active duty or service.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
§ 436.02  POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's
endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until the
person surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state. The Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that
a license is now issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such
license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No person shall be
permitted to have more than one valid license at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 436.03  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation,
the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent, guardian or custodian, and
the parent, guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver's or commercial
driver's license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the
permit holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.035  DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver's license who has not
attained the age of 17 years shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or
parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is
accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver's license who has attained the
age of 17 years but has not attained the age of 18 years shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1)A. of this section, division (a)
(1)A. of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver's
license who is traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:00
a.m. and has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from
the holder's employer.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver's license who is traveling to or from work between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and has in the holder's immediate possession
written documentation from the holder's employer.
      (3)   An employer is not liable in damages in a civil action for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is
related to, the fact that the employer provided an employee who is the holder
of a probationary driver's license with the written documentation described in
division (a)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles has available
at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in division
(a)(2) of this section, and employers and holders of probationary driver's
licenses may utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written
documentation to meet the requirements of that division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver's license who is less than 17
years of age shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
with more than one person who is not a family member occupying the vehicle
unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by the probationary
license holder's parent, guardian or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, the holder of the
probationary driver's license was traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends, or an emergency existed that
required the holder to operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section, or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this
section, if a person is issued a probationary driver's license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver's license, the holder must be accompanied by the
holder's parent or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking during whichever of the following time
periods applies:
            1.   If, on the date the holder of the probationary driver's
license pleads guilty to, is convicted of or is adjudicated in juvenile court
of having committed the moving violation, the holder has not attained the age
of 16.5 years, during the six-month period commencing on that date;
            2.   If, on the date the holder pleads guilty to, is convicted of
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed the moving violation,
the holder has attained the age of 16.5 years but not 17 years, until the
person attains the age of 17 years.
         B.   If the holder of a probationary driver's license commits a moving
violation during the six-month period after the person is issued the
probationary driver's license and before the person attains the age of 17 years
and on the date the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of or is adjudicated
in juvenile court of having committed the moving violation the person has
attained the age of 17 years, or if the person commits the moving violation
during the six-month period after the person is issued the probationary
driver's license and after the person attains the age of 17 years, the holder
is not subject to the restriction described in divisions (c)(1)A.1. and (c)
(1)A.2. of this section unless the court or juvenile court imposes such a
restriction upon the holder.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for occupational or educational driving privileges
without being accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian during the period
of time specified in that division. The court may grant the person such driving
privileges if the court finds reasonable cause to believe that the restrictions
established in division (c)(1) will seriously affect the person's ability to
continue in employment or educational training or will cause undue hardship on
the license holder or a family member of the license holder. In granting the
driving privileges, the court shall specify the purposes, times and places of
the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the
privileges granted. Occupational or educational driving privileges under this
division shall not be granted to the same person more than once. If a person is
convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having
committed a second or subsequent moving violation, any driving privileges
previously granted under this division are terminated upon the subsequent
conviction, plea or adjudication.
      (3)   No person shall violate division (c)(1)A. of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Family member" of a probationary license holder. Includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder's stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   "Moving violation." Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. "Moving
violation" does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   "Occupant restraining device." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B)-(J))
§ 436.04  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one's own, any identification card,
driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or § 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false
or fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
§ 436.05  OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's
license, permit or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
 
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).The
failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the
court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A)
that may be filed in the underlying case.
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C.  of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person's name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 436.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's driver's
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license on or about
the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person's license on
or about the person's person shall be prima facie evidence of the person's not
having obtained a driver's license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 436.071  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION;
DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION FOR FAILURE TO APPEAR IN COURT, FAILURE TO PAY A FINE
OR FAILURE TO PAY CHILD SUPPORT.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code,
other than R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other
jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate
any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
within this municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is
granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance
with the terms of the limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension for failure to appear in court, failure to
pay a fine or failure to pay child support.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4510.22 for failing to appear in court or
to pay a fine, resulting in license forfeiture.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 3123.58 for being in default in payment
of child support.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section. The person charged with a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2)
of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in
division (b)(4) of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(4)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of
division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this division (b).
         C.   In all cases, the court may impose a class seven suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range of time specified in R.C. § 4507.02(A)(7).
         D.   1.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 20
days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any
combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with
R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, or any combination of three or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon
the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the
offense to the State.
      (5)   An order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a motor vehicle from immobilization ordered under
this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that motor vehicle.
      (6)   An order for criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of a copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take the necessary
measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the
person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under division
(a) of this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.072  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver's or
commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 436.073  DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19, §
4511.191 or § 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender's vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the offender's
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Auto Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall
be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers' Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor's
Court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Electronic monitoring." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   "Equivalent offense." Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   "Jail." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (4)   "Mandatory jail term." The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)
(3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a)
of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.074  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this municipality, or
knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by
another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is
required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of R.C. § 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in divisions (d) to (i) of this section. Whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of
judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d) to (i)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
   (f)   The court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range of time specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (g)   (1)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization for 30 days of the vehicle involved in
the offense and the impoundment for 30 days of the license plates of that
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16,
or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes on the
offender, may order the immobilization for 60 days of the vehicle involved in
the offense and the impoundment for 60 days of the license plates of that
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or any combination of three or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance,
the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes
upon the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the
vehicle involved in the offense. If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to
an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned or transferred
and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or independent of
any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value
of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers
Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (h)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall
be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (i)   An order for criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of a copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take the necessary
measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the
person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (j)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged
offender to respond to a financial responsibility random verification request
under R.C. § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial financial
responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was in
compliance with R.C. § 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial
responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.075  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.08  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
"Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act", 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 436.09  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the
distinctive number and registration mark, including any county identification
sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191,
furnished by the Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor
vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in-transit permit, and the owner
or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, manufactured home, mobile home,
trailer or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is
issued two license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear
license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an
apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall
display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An
apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the license plate only on the
front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All
license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be
covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (2)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor vehicle
operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (c)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (d)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates for any period of time
which has expired, or any license plates issued in another state for which the
period of reciprocal agreement with the state of issue has expired.
   (f)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for the vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (g)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, upon which license plates are
required by law to be displayed, unless the license plates legally registered
and issued for the vehicle are fastened in such a manner, and not covered,
obscured or concealed by any part or accessory of the vehicle, to be readable
in their entirety from left to right.
   (h)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 436.10  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 436.11  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON STREETS; COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED
VEHICLE.
   (a)   (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property
upon any of the public roads or highways, due to the driving or operation
thereon of any motor vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the driver's or operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or
collision and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
driver or operator has given the driver's or operator's name and address and,
if the driver or operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner
of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, to any person injured in the accident or collision or to the operator,
occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle damaged in the accident or
collision, or to any police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event the injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given by this section, the other driver involved
in the accident or collision forthwith shall notify the nearest police
authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
driver's name, address and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
driver was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or collision
until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an emergency
vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
accident or collision results in serious physical harm or death to a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit or privilege required by this
division.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.12  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON PROPERTY OTHER THAN STREETS.
   (a)   (1)   In case of accident or collision resulting in injury or damage
to persons or property upon any public or private property other than public
roads or highways, due to the driving or operation thereon of any motor
vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor vehicle, having knowledge of
the accident or collision, shall stop, and, upon request of the person injured
or damaged, or any other person, shall give that person the driver's or
operator's name and address, and, if the driver or operator is not the owner,
the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the
registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the
driver's or operator's driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the damaged property is not
furnished this information, the driver of the motor vehicle involved in the
accident or collision, within 24 hours after the accident or collision, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the damaged property
and give the date, time and location of the accident or collision.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm or death
to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall
suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit or
privilege required by this division.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.13  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 436.14  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as a
result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street or other
property or is otherwise endangering public safety, the Chief of Police or the
Chief of the Fire Department may, without consent of the owner but with the
approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of the
accident, remove the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle is unoccupied, cargo or
personal property from the portion of the highway, public street or property
ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the highway, public street or other
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
the Chief of Police, any police officer, the Chief of the Fire Department and
any firefighter who authorizes or participates in the removal of any unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property as authorized by division (a) of this
section is not liable in civil damages for any injury, death or loss to person
or property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo or personal property. Except as provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section, if the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department
authorizes, employs or arranges to have a private tow truck operator or towing
company remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property as
authorized by division (a) of this section, that private tow truck operator or
towing company is not liable in civil damages for any injury, death or loss to
person or property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor
vehicle, cargo or personal property, and the Chief of Police or Chief of the
Fire Department is not liable in civil damages for any injury, death or loss to
person or property that results from the private tow truck operator or towing
company's removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any person or
entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or
personal property pursuant to division (a) of this section if that removal
causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous material or to structural
damage to the roadway.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a private tow
truck operator or towing company that was not authorized, employed or arranged
by the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department or to a private tow
truck operator or towing company that was authorized, employed or arranged by
the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department to perform the removal of
the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property and the private tow
truck operator or towing company performed the removal in a reckless or willful
manner.
   (c)   As used in this section, "hazardous material" has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2305.232.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
§ 436.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438:  SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
   
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application
   
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights
   
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
   
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
   
438.05   Rear red reflectors
   
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles
   
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination
   
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads
   
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
   
438.10   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required; lights and reflectors
on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery
   
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights
   
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights
   
438.13   Two lights displayed
   
438.14   Use of headlight beams
   
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles
   
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners' vehicles
   
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children
   
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights
   
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes
   
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
   
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
   
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear
   
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper
   
438.24   Tinted glass; materials on glass
   
438.25   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle
   
438.26   Motor vehicle stop lights
   
438.27   Bumpers
   
438.28   Air cleaner required
   
438.29   Use of child restraints
   
438.30   Use of occupant restraining devices
   
438.31   Reserved
   
438.32   Air bags
 
   
438.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle equipment, see §
444.05
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see §
678.04
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see §
440.08
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see §
446.02
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see §
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals, see §
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see §
440.03
Statutory reference:
   Collector's vehicles, see R.C. §§ 4513.38, 4513.41
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see R.C. §
4513.28
§ 438.01  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section or R.C. § 4513.02(A), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 438.03  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 438.04  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
the registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50
feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating the registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 438.05  REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 438.06  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by the regulations, and the equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   This equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 438.07  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 438.08  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 438.09  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.10  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED; LIGHTS AND
REFLECTORS ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.
   (a)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G), not specifically required to be
equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall, at the
times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle and
also shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and reflectors required by this section shall
meet standards adopted by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Director of Transportation, a city or
village engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when the
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and
the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of
25 miles per hour or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25 miles
per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle (SMV) emblem. The
emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than
500 feet to the rear. The Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and
specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The
standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall
correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles
per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this section. As used in
this division, "machinery" does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by
an animal.
   (c)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles
and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in division (b) of this section
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving
vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of
vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (d)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in division
(b) of this section, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a
primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1,
1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting
device as specified in division (b) of this section.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate on a street or highway
any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays a slow-moving
vehicle emblem as specified in division (b) of this section and a speed
identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural
Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS).
   (e)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-
moving vehicle in division (b) of this section, in addition to the use of the
slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, in
addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be equipped with
a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a double-faced light is
used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. In
addition to the lights described in this division, farm machinery and motor
vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or
rotating amber light, as permitted by R.C. § 4513.17 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display simultaneously flashing
turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section.
   (f)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all
times be equipped in one of the following ways:
         A.   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with division (b) of
this section;
         B.   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under division (f)(2) below;
         C.   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in division (f)(2) below.
      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C.
Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the position of
mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this division,
permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or
silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the
animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps.
   (g)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall display
a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification
Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this division.
      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and is towing, pulling or
otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is
the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the
agricultural tractor.
   (h)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator shall
possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating
the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the
agricultural tractor to operate.
   (i)   As used in this section, "boat trailer" means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (j)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.
      (1)   A.   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose model year was
2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and display reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the
front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all visible to the front; and by red
reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash simultaneously
and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
         C.   The lamps and reflectors required by division (j)(1)A. of this
section and their placement shall meet standards and specifications contained
in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber reflectors and red
reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2, respectively, of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002 or later,
when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be
equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps that meet or exceed
the lighting, illumination and marking standards and specifications that are
applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year specified
in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11
APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways, or any
subsequent revisions of that standard.
      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (j)(1) of this
section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights required
or permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or § 4513.17, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being operated or
traveling on a street or highway.
      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a street or
highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street or highway in
violation of divisions (j)(1) or (j)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))
§ 438.11  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 438.12  COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 438.13  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 438.14  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 438.15  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that the vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 438.16  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles
servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, traffic line stripers, snow plows,
rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, Department of Transportation
maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles and similar
equipment operated by the Department or local authorities, which shall be
equipped with and display, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating those lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber
light, but shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any
other color, nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in division
(c)(1) of this section does not apply to the machinery or vehicles. Farm
machinery may also display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon or
permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any
vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red
light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except
a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal
and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty,
no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-
of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with,
or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing
combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 438.165  LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS' VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
§ 438.17  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation "caution — children,"
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.18  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 438.19  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on those motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer's
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.20  HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. The equipment shall not be used except when the
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver
of the emergency vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 438.21  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person's possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or equipped in any way
to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of the
vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 438.22  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 438.23  WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD
WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of
the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield
wipers.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 438.24  TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined
in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer's tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver's seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, "child with disabilities" has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C)-(I))
   (h)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after
the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.241(J))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.25  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle's left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.26  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 438.27  BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Gross vehicle weight rating." The manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   "Manufacturer." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   "Multipurpose passenger vehicle." A motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (4)   "Passenger car." Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   "Truck." Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height has been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section or R.C. § 4513.021, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.28  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an internal combustion
engine unless the carburetion system of the vehicle is protected with an air
filter, a flame-arresting device or any other accepted method of protection
that is adequate for this purpose.  If the original device or system is
replaced, it shall be replaced with one that is equal to or better than the
original equipment.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a person doing automotive repair work
on a motor vehicle that necessitates this device being removed while the work
is performed.
(1986 Code, § 337.25)
§ 438.29  USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.011, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b) or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.30  USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Automobile." Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the "National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      (2)   "Commercial tractor," "passenger car" and "commercial car." Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   "Occupant restraining device." A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   "Passenger." Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   "Tort action." A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss
to person or property. "Tort action" includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91,
but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
      (6)   "Vehicle" and "motor vehicle." As used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator's seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions. Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person
who is required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat. Division
(b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an employee of the
United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during
any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to
deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this
section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician
licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor
licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the
person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff's failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
§ 438.31  RESERVED.
§ 438.32  AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “air bag” has the same meaning as in 49
C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle any object
to fulfill the function of an air bag, including an air bag, other than an air
bag that was designed in conformance with or that is regulated by Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208 for the make, model and model year of the
vehicle, knowing that the object is not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of improper
replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense. On each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4549.20)  (1996 Code, § 438.32)
§ 438.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440:  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
   
440.01   Load limits
   
440.02   Maximum width, height and length
   
440.03   Wheel protectors
   
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required
   
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
   
440.08   Occupying travel trailer or manufactured home while in motion
   
440.09   Route and load information
   
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads
   
440.11   Chauffeured limousines
   
440.12   Use of alleys in wet weather
 
   
440.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see §
452.11
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see §
442.09
   Operation of sound trucks, see §
648.13
   Parking of oversized vehicles, see §
452.13
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see §
416.06
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see §
432.35
   Stopping at grade crossings, see §§
432.34,
432.35,
432.36
   Truck loading zones, see §
452.10
Statutory reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Display of certificates of registration, see R.C. § 4549.18
§ 440.01  LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction,
upon application in writing and for good cause shown, may issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in
conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, upon any highway under its
jurisdiction.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a special
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the special permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality. Permits may be issued for any period of time not to exceed
one year, as the local authority in its discretion determines advisable or for
the duration of any public construction project.
      (3)   The application for a permit shall be in the form that the
municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a permit fee to be
imposed and collected when any permit described in this section is issued. The
permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse the municipality for the
administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit, and also to cover the cost
of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway or a street or highway
structure as the result of the operation of the nonconforming vehicle or
combination of vehicles. For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted
by the Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is
deemed a nondivisible load.
      (4)   The municipality may issue or withhold a permit. If a permit is to
be issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for
the vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of
vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police
officer or authorized agent of any authority granting the permit. No person
shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (b)   Violations. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year
after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity
with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross weight of five tons,
upon any street in the municipality other than state routes and county roads,
except those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as such by
appropriate traffic signs, and except when the operation is necessary to load
or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of the vehicle
or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage through
the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a state route
or a designated truck route within the municipality shall confine the deviation
to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the departure. On county
roads, Council or other duly designated local authority shall establish
reasonable weight limits commensurate with the construction and material
specifications for the roads and the load resistance of the roads as determined
by the County Engineer. County roads shall be posted with signs indicating the
weight limits.
   (d)   Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for the vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge $25, and for
each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the Police Department in
supervising the movement of the vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
$50.
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this section,
streets and highways shall be posted with signs indicating "no thru trucks -
gross weight 5 tons" or words of similar import to inform drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of the permit and denial of request for any future permit. This
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 440.02  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions thereof over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions thereof as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions thereof as the
Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28-1/2 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when
operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the
operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions
thereof as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 40 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13-1/2 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion thereof that the Director designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment. The
owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not specifically
enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the dimensions
provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways and streets
of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director governing such
movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal as
provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (2)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, "recreational vehicle" has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03  WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the
municipality, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt,
water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The
protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of
the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps
under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as
wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and
constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body
construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are
required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts
of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at
least to the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.05  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal
or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a
public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site
where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair facility.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability
established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a vehicle in the
manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no person
shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality a traction engine
or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains
or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, and no person
shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved highways of this
municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind. "Traction
engine" or "tractor," as used in this section, applies to all self-propelling
engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled by any form of
engine, motor or mechanical power.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, "studded tire" means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire.
   (d)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety
vehicle or school bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or
highway in this municipality, except during the period extending from the first
day of November of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the
succeeding year.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile
home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
§ 440.10  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless the vehicle is
so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the
vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by R.C. § 4513.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (b)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
§ 440.12  USE OF ALLEYS IN WET WEATHER.
   (a)   No person operating a vehicle that exceeds three tons (6,000 pounds)
in gross weight shall use, drive upon, traverse or in any way occupy any public
alley in the city with the vehicle when the alley has been posted according to
division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Whenever the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers deems it necessary,
due to excess water conditions, to close the public alleys within the city to
excessively heavy vehicles, he or she shall cause to be posted at the entrance
way of each alley a sign no smaller than 160 square inches, which sign shall
state that the alley is closed to all vehicles weighing in excess of three tons
(6,000 pounds) gross weight and the sign shall cite this section.
   (c)   When the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers deems it necessary to
post the alleys, pursuant to this section, he or she shall cause written notice
to be sent by certified mail to each common carrier or refuse hauler licensed
to do business in the city, setting forth that the alleys are closed to all
vehicular traffic exceeding the gross weight as provided above.
(Ord. 12-78, passed 6-5-1978)
§ 440.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442:  DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
   
442.01   Definitions
   
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating; exclusions
   
442.03   Licensing requirements
   
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
442.05   Criminal offenses
   
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. Part 383
   
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving
   
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving
   
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited
   
442.10   Use of engine retarder prohibited
 
   
442.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving under the influence, generally, see §
434.01
   Load limits, see §
440.01
   Route and load information, see §
440.09
Statutory reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see R.C. §§ 4921.30, 4923.16
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see R.C. § 4513.28
§ 442.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Alcohol concentration." The concentration of alcohol in a person's
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   "Commercial driver's license." A license issued in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor
vehicle.
   (c)   "Commercial driver's license information system." The information
system established pursuant to the requirements of the "Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   "Commercial motor vehicle." Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a combined gross vehicle weight
rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross vehicle weight rating
of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001
pounds or more, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle having a gross vehicle
weight rating that is not in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of less than
26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16 passengers including
the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   (e)   "Controlled substance." Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
"Controlled Substances Act", 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   "Conviction." An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of
original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance in
court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment
of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail,
regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   "Disqualification." Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person's privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person's privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   "Drive." To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.
   (i)   "Driver." Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of
a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's
license.
   (j)   "Driver's license." A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (k)   "Drug of abuse." Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01, or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.
   (l)   "Eligible unit of local government." A village, township or county
that has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most
recent federal census.
   (m)   "Employer." Any person, including the federal government, any state
and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial
motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (n)   "Endorsement." An authorization on a person's commercial driver's
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (o)   "Farm truck." A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in
the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150
miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry
and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity
used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry
production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for
breeding, feeding or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm,
when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used
in the operations of a motor transportation company or private motor carrier.
   (p)   "Fatality." The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (q)   "Felony." Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (r)   "Foreign jurisdiction." Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (s)   "Gross vehicle weight rating." The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (t)   "Hazardous materials." Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49
C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (u)   "Imminent hazard." The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a
substantial endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   (v)   "Motor vehicle." A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that the term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (w)   "Out-of-service order." A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation
is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (x)   "Peace officer." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (y)   "Portable tank." A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to
be loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (z)   "Public safety vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (aa)   "Recreational vehicle." Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (bb)   "Residence." Any person's residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (cc)   "School bus." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (dd)   "Serious traffic violation." A conviction arising from a single
charge of operating a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. § 4506.03 or a conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle
that involves any of the following:
      (1)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit by
15 miles per hour or more;
      (2)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or § 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
      (3)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
      (4)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially equivalent
law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that involves
the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial driver's
license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle group
being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
      (5)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially equivalent
law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that involves
the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial driver's
license being in the person's possession;
      (6)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
      (7)   Violation of any other law of this state or an ordinance or
resolution relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, that is
determined to be a serious traffic violation by the United States Secretary of
Transportation and the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates as such by
rule.
   (ee)   "State." A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (ff)   "Tank vehicle." Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid and has a maximum capacity greater than 119 gallons or is
designed to transport gaseous materials and has a water capacity greater than
1,000 pounds within a tank that is either permanently or temporarily attached
to the vehicle or its chassis. "Tank vehicle" does not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Any portable tank having a rated capacity of less than 1,000
gallons;
      (2)   Tanks used exclusively as a fuel tank for the motor vehicle to
which it is attached;
      (3)   An empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation and that is readily distinguishable from a transportation tank;
      (4)   Ready-mix concrete mixers.
   (gg)   "Tester." A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (hh)   "United States." The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (ii)   "Vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING; EXCLUSIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 442.03  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person's
possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one valid driver's
license issued by this state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person's driving privilege is
suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person's commercial driver's license.
(R.C. § 4506.12(E))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4506.12(F))
§ 442.04  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver's license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
Each person who drives or expects to drive a commercial motor vehicle in
interstate or foreign commerce or is otherwise subject to 49 C.F.R. 391 et
seq., as amended, shall certify to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles at the time
of application for a commercial driver's license that the person is in
compliance with these standards. Any person who is not subject to 49 C.F.R. 391
et seq., as amended, shall also certify at the time of application that the
person is not subject to these standards.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person's
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (7)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17;
      (8)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person's commercial
driving privileges are revoked, suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (9)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (10)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in
R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (11)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (12)   Violate any prohibitions described in divisions (a)(2) to (a)(11)
of this section while transporting hazardous materials.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 442.06  APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person's employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 442.07  INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS;
UNAUTHORIZED DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant's employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08  AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. § 4506.15,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining a
warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person's whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test
that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person's commercial driver's license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, "jurisdictional limits" means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
§ 442.09  PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person's ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle.
No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver's ability
or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, § 4511.76, § 4511.761, § 4511.762, §
4511.764 or § 4511.77, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 442.10  USE OF ENGINE RETARDER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person while operating a motor vehicle shall employ an engine
retarder to decelerate the motor vehicle.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “engine retarder” means any device that
enables or facilitates the use of exhaust restriction or compression release
braking.
(Ord. 15-2014, passed 9-2-2014)
§ 442.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
   
444.01   Code application to bicycles
   
444.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses
   
444.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles
   
444.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast
   
444.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles
   
444.06   Riding bicycles upon sidewalks
   
444.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles
   
444.08   Parking; locks
   
444.09   Parent's responsibility
   
444.10   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles
   
444.11   Operation of motorized bicycles
 
   
444.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle defined, see §
402.01
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes, see §
438.19
   Motorcycle defined, see §
402.01
   Motorcycle headlight, see §
438.03
   Motorcycle operator's license required, see §
436.01
   Off-highway motorcycles, see
Ch. 446
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see §
432.41
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
§ 444.01  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this traffic code that are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
who violates any provisions of this traffic code described in division (a) of
this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation or
summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as
the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person
who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this traffic code described in division (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the
trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered
the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the court,
notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to the contrary, may
require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully
complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in
lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by this traffic code or the Ohio
Revised Code for that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 444.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "snowmobile" has the same meaning as
given that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other
person upon the bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly
attached and regular seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, nor shall any
motorcycle be operated on a highway when the handlebars or grips are more than
15 inches higher than the seat or saddle for the operator.
      (7)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. No
person who is under the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or license bearing a “NOVICE” designation that is currently in
effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway,
or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device shall conform with rules
adopted by the Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this paragraph or a
violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the
person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a
protective helmet that conforms with rules adopted by the Director of Public
Safety.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
         A.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03(A)
(1).
         B.   While carrying a passenger.
         C.   On any limited access highway.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 444.03  ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 444.04  RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not
more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at
the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions
that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when
necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface
hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if
the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 444.05  LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator
that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light
only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and
white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible
signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
§ 444.06  RIDING BICYCLES UPON SIDEWALKS.
   A person operating a bicycle shall ride upon the sidewalk rather than the
roadway when sidewalks are available, except that no person shall ride a
bicycle upon a sidewalk upon or along which signs have been erected by
authority of Council or other duly designated local authority prohibiting
bicycle riding, or within a business district. At no time shall a person under
the age of 11 years operate a bicycle on a street.
§ 444.07  SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a designated usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a street, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the
street.
   (b)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, the
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (c)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. These intersections are to be crossed by walking
the bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (d)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (e)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. The signals shall conform
with R.C. § 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (g)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (h)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
street.
   (i)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
§ 444.08  PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 444.09  PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 444.10  SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 444.11  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver's or commercial driver's license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator's
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator's ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event shall
any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four years.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle
license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a), (d) or (e) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 444.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 446:  SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
   
446.01   Definitions
   
446.02   Equipment
   
446.03   Code application; prohibited operation
   
446.04   Permitted operation
   
446.05   Licensing requirements of operator
   
446.06   Accident reports
   
446.07   Local control within police power
   
446.08   Registration of vehicles
   
446.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender
 
   
446.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see
Ch. 444
   Operation on bicycle paths, see §
432.41
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see §
444.02
   Street or highway defined, see §
402.01
Statutory reference:
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see R.C. § 4519.47
§ 446.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "All-purpose vehicle." Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes.
The term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any
vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   (b)   "Dealer." Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   "Electronic" and "electronic record." Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   "Electronic dealer." A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.
   (e)   "Interstate highway." Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   (f)   "Limited-access highway" or "freeway." Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 5511.02.
   (g)   "Off-highway motorcycle." Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (h)   "Operator." Any person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
   (i)   "Owner." Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   (j)   "Snowmobile." Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (k)   "Street" or "highway." Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 446.02  EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying the
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, the requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
"A" scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (b)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (b) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 446.03  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code shall be applied to the
operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
except that no snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated as follows:
      (1)   On any street, highway, limited access highway or freeway or the
right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel only during such time and in
such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety or local authority having
jurisdiction shall designate, and except as provided in §
446.04;
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting the operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 446.04  PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over the highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits the operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 446.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver's or
commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person's parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit the operation on
state-controlled land under its jurisdiction when the person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 446.06  ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 446.07  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519
shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 446.08  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section, no
person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state's law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 446.09  OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
§ 446.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note: 
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE EIGHT - PARKING
      Chapter
         
452.   PARKING GENERALLY
CHAPTER 452:  PARKING GENERALLY
Section
   
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
   
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places
   
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; handicapped persons
   
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
   
452.06   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
   
452.07   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake and
the like
   
452.08   Opening doors on side available to traffic
   
452.09   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
452.10   Passenger zones and loading zones
   
452.11   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
452.12   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
452.13   Parking oversize vehicles
   
452.14   Snow emergencies on streets
   
452.15   Snow emergencies on municipal parking lots
   
452.16   Parking or stopping in fire or snow removal lanes
   
452.17   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
452.18   Waiver
 
   
452.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Impounding; redemption, see §
404.07
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Parking defined, see §
402.01
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see §
432.27
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
444.08
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see §
404.01
   Stop defined, see §
402.01
   Stopping and standing defined, see §
402.01
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 452.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle
shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 452.02  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the officer may move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of the highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 452.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
the standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
(R.C. § 4511.68(A)(1)-(13))
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or where the curbing is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of the
maximum time limited by signs;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
(R.C. § 4511.68(A)(15), (16))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68)
§ 452.04  MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in this case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled
parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction
other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or highway.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of
facilities near, on, over or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or park
where necessary in order to perform the work, provided a flagperson is on duty
or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director
of Transportation.
   (e)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by all
political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and instrumentalities
thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned,
rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations
shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether
permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of
access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators and ramps.
All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C. § 3781.111
(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the
ground to the top edge of the sign shall measure five feet. If a new sign or a
replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after
October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or
affixed next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable
for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking
location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that
location.
   (f)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at special
parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at special
clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned parking
lots, parking garages or other parking areas and designated in accordance with
that division, unless one of the following applies:
         A.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; or
         B.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A. or (f)(1)B. of this section may be
towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
      (3)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A. or (f)
(1)B. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Handicapped person." Any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or so severely handicapped as
to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose
mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary or other
handicapping condition.
      (2)   "Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
      (3)   "Special license plates" and "removable windshield placard." Any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. § 4503.41 or § 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country or
sovereignty.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A. or (f)(1)B. of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in division (k)
(2)A. and (k)(2)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in division
(k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or (f)
(1)B. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. An
offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or (f)(1)B. of this section shall be
fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of
the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)B. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (f)
(1)B. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or
(f)(1)B. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A. or
(f)(1)B. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be
reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person's appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
division (k)(2) of this section to the municipality. Except as provided in
division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the fine moneys it
receives under division (k)(2) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in
complying with the signage and notice requirements contained in division (e) of
this section. The municipality may use up to 50% of each fine it receives under
division (k)(2) of this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy,
support and assistive technology programs for persons with disabilities, and
for public improvements within the municipality that benefit or assist persons
with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer
the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(3) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
§ 452.05  WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   Impounding abandoned motor vehicle on public property; notice;
disposition.
      (1)   The Police Chief of the municipality may order into storage any
motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that has come into the possession of the Police Chief as a result of
the Police Chief’s duties or that has been left on a public street or other
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within
the right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle
in such place, except that when such motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately. The Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
      (2)   The Police Chief immediately shall cause a search to be made of the
records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the owner and any
lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage by the Police Chief, and if
known, shall send or cause to be sent notice to the owner or lienholder at his
or her last known address by certified mail with return receipt requested, that
the motor vehicle will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed
within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice. The owner or lienholder
of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges
incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership,
which may be evidenced by a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of
title to the motor vehicle. If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle
reclaims it after a search of the records of the Bureau has been conducted and
after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as described in this
section, and the search was conducted by the owner of the place of storage or
the owner’s employee, and the notice was sent to the motor vehicle owner by the
owner of the place of storage or the owner’s employee, the owner or lienholder
shall pay to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any
expenses or charged incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle
within ten days of the date of mailing the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62, the Police Chief,
without charge to any party, shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county
in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with
the requirements of R.C. § 4513.61. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the
Clerk, without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to
be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided
in R.C. § 4513.62, the Police Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit,
as prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, describing the motor vehicle
and the manner in which it was disposed, and that all requirements of R.C. §
4513.61 have been complied with. The Police Chief shall retain the original of
the affidavit for his or her records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30
days of the presentation, will issue to such owner a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
      (4)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives
such an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this
section, the dealer or facility is not required to obtain a state certificate
of title to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the
vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are
delivered to the Clerk of Courts.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (b)   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (b)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing of
the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the municipality
from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.06  PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
   (c)   (1)   The owner of private property may establish a private tow-away
zone only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner posts on the owner's property a sign that is at least
18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the
property, and that contains at least all of the following information:
            1.   A notice that the property is a private tow-away zone and that
vehicles not authorized to park on the property will be towed away;
            2.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed-away
vehicle can be recovered and the address of the place to which the vehicle will
be taken and the place from which it may be recovered;
            3.   A statement that the vehicle may be recovered at any time
during the day or night upon the submission of proof of ownership and the
payment of a towing charge, in an amount not to exceed $90, and a storage
charge, in an amount not to exceed $12 per 24-hour period; except that the
charge for towing shall not exceed $150, and the storage charge shall not
exceed $20 per 24-hour period, if the vehicle has a manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a
combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer.
         B.   The place to which the towed vehicle is taken and from which it
may be recovered is conveniently located, is well lighted and is on or within a
reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of
public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the
municipality in which the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (c)(1) without the consent of
the owner of the property or in violation of any posted parking condition or
regulation, the owner or the owner's agent may remove, or cause the removal of,
the vehicle, the owner and the operator of the vehicle shall be deemed to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle and to the payment of the
towing and storage charges specified in division (c)(1)A.3. of this section,
and the owner, subject to division (d) of this section, may recover a vehicle
that has been so removed only in accordance with division (f) of this section.
      (3)   If the municipality requires tow trucks and tow truck operators to
be licensed, no owner of private property located within the municipality shall
remove or shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle pursuant to
division (c)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed tow
truck operator.
      (4)   Divisions (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this section do not affect or
limit the operation of R.C. §§ 4513.60 through 4513.65 as they relate to
property other than private property that is established as a private tow-away
zone under division (c)(1) of this section.
   (d)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that has been ordered into
storage pursuant to division R.C. § 4513.60(A) or of a vehicle that is being
removed under authority of division (c)(2) of this section arrives after the
vehicle has been prepared for removal but prior to its actual removal from the
property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity to pay a fee of
not more than one-half of the charge for the removal of vehicles under R.C. §
4513.60(A) or of vehicles under division (c)(2) of this section, whichever is
applicable, that normally is assessed by the person who has prepared the
vehicle for removal, in order to obtain release of the vehicle. Upon payment of
that fee, the vehicle shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its
release, the owner or operator immediately shall move it so that:
      (1)   If the motor vehicle was ordered into storage pursuant to R.C. §
4513.60(A), it is not on the private residential or private agricultural
property without the permission of the person having the right to possession of
the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the
permission of the owner, whichever is applicable;
      (2)   If the vehicle was being removed under authority of division (c)(2)
of this section, it is not parked on the private property established as a
private tow-away zone without the consent of the owner or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation.
   (e)   (1)   If an owner of private property that is established as a private
tow-away zone in accordance with division (c)(1) of this section or the
authorized agent of such an owner removes or causes the removal of a vehicle
from that property under authority of division (c)(2) of this section, the
owner or agent promptly shall notify the Police Department of the removal, the
vehicle’s license number, make, model and color, the location from which it was
removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person
from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has
been taken and from which it may be recovered.
      (2)   The Police Chief shall maintain a record of vehicles that the
Police Chief orders into storage pursuant to R.C. § 4513.60(A) and of vehicles
removed from private property in the Police Chief's jurisdiction that is
established as a private tow-away zone of which the Police Chief has received
notice under division (e)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry
for each such vehicle that identifies the vehicle's license number, make, model
and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of its
removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and
the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be
recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle
shall be provided to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a
telephone call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to its location.
      (3)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Police Chief's order for the removal and storage of a vehicle under R.C. §
4513.60(A) shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with which
the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its
location.
   (f)   The owner of a vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to R.C. §
4513.60(A) or of a vehicle that is removed under authority of division (c)(2)
of this section may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred
in its removal, in an amount not to exceed $90, and storage, in an amount not
to exceed $12 per 24-hour period; except that the charge for towing shall not
exceed $150, and the storage charge shall not exceed $20 per 24-hour period, if
the vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial tractor and
trailer or semitrailer. Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be
evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle also shall be required for
reclamation of the vehicle. If a vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.60(A) remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the procedures
established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 shall apply.
   (g)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under division
(c)(1) of this section other than in accordance with division (c)(2) of this
section, and no person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor vehicle
from any other private property other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 4513.60
through 4513.65.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
§ 452.07  UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
THE LIKE.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle shall not apply to an emergency vehicle or a public safety
vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 452.08  OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 452.09  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
§ 452.10  PASSENGER ZONES AND LOADING ZONES.
   (a)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine the location of
passenger zones and loading zones and shall erect and maintain or cause to be
maintained appropriate signs indicating the same.
   (b)   No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or
unloading or passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone.
   (c)   No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery or pick-up and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone.  In no case shall
the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 247, passed 10-20-1930; Ord. 7-74, passed 2-4-1974)
§ 452.11  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.12  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No driver shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations,
traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
   (b)   No driver shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner or under
such condition as to leave available less than ten feet of width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 247, passed 10-20-1930)
§ 452.13  PARKING OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   No person shall park any motor vehicle of more than six and one-half feet in
width and/or more than 25 feet in length on any city street or highway from
sunset to sunrise.
(Ord. 45-72, passed 9-5-1972)
§ 452.14  SNOW EMERGENCIES ON STREETS.
   (a)   In order to facilitate the cleaning of certain streets and to expedite
the free flow of vehicular traffic, motor vehicles shall not be parked on the
streets designated herein at such times as the records of the National Weather
Service indicate that two inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of
a further snowfall. All motor vehicles parked prior to the time weather
conditions prohibit parking must be removed by the owners or operators. Any
motor vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be removed by order of
the Director of Public Safety and Service or designee and shall subject the
owner or operator to penalties provided in this traffic code as well as any
impounding fees and storage costs.
   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners or operators of motor
vehicles to ascertain whether weather conditions require the removal of their
motor vehicles from the streets designated and to remove all motor vehicles
parked in violation of the provisions of this section or any other ordinances
of the city. While the city will make every effort to inform the public of the
existence of weather conditions requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles
from the streets designated herein, the owners and operators of motor vehicles
parked in these areas shall have full responsibility to determine existing
weather conditions and to remove parked motor vehicles if the weather
conditions are such as to require their removal under the terms of this
section.
   (c)   After the records of the National Weather Service indicate that two
inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of further snowfall, the
Director of Public Safety and Service or designee shall order the removal of
all vehicles parked on the streets designated herein which have not been
removed by the owners or operators thereof. The vehicles shall be removed as
provided in §
404.07.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section, with respect
to failure to removed parked motor vehicles when the weather conditions
described in this section require their removal, shall be deemed to be
illegally parked and shall be subject to the penalties provided in this traffic
code. In addition, when a motor vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound, the
motor vehicle may be recovered only upon payment of the towing and storage
charges imposed.
   (e)   The Police Department shall use all available means of disseminating
information as to the existence of weather conditions requiring removal of
parked motor vehicles from the areas designated. The notice shall be
disseminated through the radio, newspaper, television and all other available
media to the extent feasible. The dissemination of this information however,
shall not relieve owners or operators of motor vehicles from the responsibility
of ascertaining the existence of weather conditions requiring the removal of
parked motor vehicles from the areas designated.
   (f)   The streets where parking is prohibited after two inches of snow have
fallen, and when there is a prospect of further snowfall, are the streets
within the business district, as defined in §
402.01, including the whole of any street wherein the boundary of the business
district is the centerline of the street.
(Ord. 26-71, passed 10-18-1971; Ord. 6-2008, passed 4-7-2008)
§ 452.15  SNOW EMERGENCIES ON MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS.
   (a)   In order to facilitate the cleaning of municipal parking lots and to
expedite the free flow of vehicular traffic, motor vehicles shall not be parked
on municipal parking lots at such times as the records of the National Weather
Service indicate that two inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of
a further snowfall. All motor vehicles parked prior to the time that weather
conditions prohibit parking must be removed by the owners or operators thereof.
Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be removed by order
of the Director of Public Safety and Service or designee and shall subject the
owner or operator thereof to the penalties provided in this traffic code as
well as to any impounding fees and storage costs.
   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners or operators of motor
vehicles to ascertain whether or not weather conditions require the removal of
their motor vehicles from the parking lots designated and to remove all motor
vehicles parked in violation of the provisions of this section or any other
ordinances of the city. While the city will make every effort to inform the
public of the existence of weather conditions requiring the removal of parked
motor vehicles from the parking lots designated herein, the owners and
operators of motor vehicles parked in these areas shall have full
responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to remove parked
motor vehicles if the weather conditions are such as to require their removal
under the provision of this section.
   (c)   After the records of the National Weather Service indicate that two
inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of further snowfall, the
Director of Public Safety and Service or designee shall order the removal of
all vehicles parked on municipal parking lots which have not been removed by
the owners or operators thereof. The vehicles shall be removed as provided in §
404.07.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties provided in this traffic code, when a
motor vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound, the motor vehicle may be
removed only upon the payment of the towing and storage charges imposed.
   (e)   The Police Department shall use all available means of disseminating
information as to the existence of weather conditions requiring removal of
parked motor vehicles from the areas designated. The notice shall be
disseminated through radio, newspaper, television and all other available media
to the extent feasible. The dissemination of this information, however, shall
not relieve owners or operators of motor vehicles from the responsibility of
ascertaining the existence of weather conditions requiring the removal of
parked motor vehicles from the areas designated.
(Ord. 7-76, passed 4-5-1976; Ord. 6-2008, passed 4-7-2008)
§ 452.16  PARKING OR STOPPING IN FIRE OR SNOW REMOVAL LANES.
   No person shall park or stop a vehicle within two feet of the paved portion
of the roadway on any street declared to be a fire and/or snow removal lane.
(Ord. 2-79, passed 1-2-1979)
§ 452.17  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
§ 452.18  WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay the sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. The payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for the alleged violation.  Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIX:  GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
606.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
608.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE
         
612.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
618.   ANIMALS
         
624.   DRUGS
         
625.   PROHIBITION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSING, CULTIVATION, AND RETAIL
DISTRIBUTION WITHIN THE CITY
         
628.   FAIR HOUSING
         
630.   GAMBLING
         
636.   OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
         
642.   OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
         
648.   PEACE DISTURBANCES
         
660.   SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
         
662.   WEEDS
         
666.   SEX RELATED OFFENSES
         
668.   CRIMINAL CONDUCT IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
672.   THEFT AND FRAUD
         
678.   WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
         
698.   PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
CHAPTER 606:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
606.01   Definitions
   
606.02   Classification of offenses
   
606.03   Offenses defined
   
606.04   Rules of construction
   
606.05   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions
   
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
606.08   Culpable mental states
   
606.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
606.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
606.11   Attempts
   
606.12   Complicity
   
606.13   Self defense; limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
Statutory reference:
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Definition of "imprisoned", see R.C. § 1.05
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.06
   Venue, see R.C. §§ 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Campaign committee," "contribution," "legislative campaign fund,"
"political action committee," "political contributing entity" and "political
party."  Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   (b)   "Contraband."  Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property's involvement in
an offense. "Contraband" includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   "Deadly force."  Any force that carries a substantial risk that it
will proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   "Detention."  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. §
2945.37, § 2945.371, § 2945.38, § 2945.39, § 2945.40, § 2945.401 or § 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in
this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person
on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane or place while being returned from outside of this state
into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B).  For a person confined in a
county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C.
§ 5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and going
to and from the work site.
   (e)   "Detention facility."  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   "Force."  Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   "Law enforcement officer."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or State Highway Patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of the statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member's appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a Sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.01 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the Armed Forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or § 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   "Not guilty by reason of insanity."  A person is "not guilty by reason
of insanity" relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in
the manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   "Offense of violence."
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, § 2903.02, § 2903.03, § 2903.04, §
2903.11, § 2903.12, § 2903.13, § 2903.15, § 2903.21, § 2903.211, § 2903.22, §
2905.01, § 2905.02, § 2905.11, § 2905.32, § 2907.02, § 2907.03, § 2907.05, §
2909.02, § 2909.03, § 2909.24, § 2911.01, § 2911.02, § 2911.11, § 2917.01, §
2917.02, § 2917.03, § 2917.31, § 2919.25, § 2921.03, § 2921.04, § 2921.34 or §
2923.161, division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of division
(B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (j)   "Official proceeding."  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   "Party official."  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he
or she directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   "Person."
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal
offense, "person" includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this general offenses code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, "person" includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, "unborn human"
means an individual organism of the species homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth.  "Viable" means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term "person" that is set forth in
division (1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal offense in
any of the following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, § 2903.02,
§ 2903.03, § 2903.04, § 2903.05, § 2903.06, § 2903.08, § 2903.11, § 2903.12, §
2903.13, § 2903.14, § 2903.21 or § 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the
conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does
violate R.C. § 2919.12, § 2919.13(B), § 2919.151, § 2919.17 or § 2919.18, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a
violation of that section, as applicable.  Consent is sufficient under this
division if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to
the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   "Physical harm to persons."  Any injury, illness or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   "Physical harm to property."  Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment.  "Physical harm to property" does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   "Privilege."  An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   "Property."
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property.  "Property" includes but is not limited
to cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent.  "Financial instruments
associated with computers" include but are not limited to checks, drafts,
warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters
of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization
mechanisms, marketable securities or any computer system representations of any
of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, "trade secret" has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and "telecommunications service" and "information service"
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of "contraband" in
this section, "cable television service," "computer," "computer network,"
"computer software," "computer system," "data," and "telecommunications device"
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (q)   "Provider agreement" and "medical assistance program."  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.40.
   (r)   “Public official.”  Any elected or appointed officer, employee or
agent of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary
or permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges
and law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer,
or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   (s)   “Public servant.” 
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official.
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant.
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   (t)   "Risk."  A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   "School," "school building" and "school premises."  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (v)   "School activity."  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07.
   (w)   "School bus."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (x)   "School safety zone."  Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity and school bus.
   (y)   "Serious physical harm to persons."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   "Serious physical harm to property."  Any physical harm to property
that does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   "Substantial risk."  A strong possibility, as contrasted with a
remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that
certain circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   "Valuable thing" or "valuable benefit."  Includes but is not limited
to a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this general offenses code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 606.03  OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this general offenses code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this general
offenses code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet that
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 606.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this general offenses code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this general offenses code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this general offenses code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this general offenses code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this general offenses code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 606.05  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction. 
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The Courts of Common Pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those Courts of Common Pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent Court of Common Pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, "computer," "computer system," "computer
network," "information service," "telecommunication," "telecommunications
device," "telecommunications service," "data" and "writing" have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
§ 606.06  LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred unless
it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (h) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, § 2903.04, § 2905.01, § 2907.02, §
2907.03, § 2907.04, § 2907.05, § 2907.21, § 2909.02, § 2909.22, § 2909.23, §
2909.24, § 2909.26, § 2909.27, § 2909.28, § 2909.29, § 2911.01, § 2911.02, §
2911.11, § 2911.12 or § 2917.02, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or § 2903.12 if
the victim is a peace officer, a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony,
or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person's legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person's legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a
public servant." The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C.
§ 101.71, § 101.91, § 121.61 or § 2921.13, § 102.03(F) or (H), § 2921.02(A), §
2921.43(A) or (B), or § 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an
offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of
any municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   "Public servant" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs.  In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (e)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same.  A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (f)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused's identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused's purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (i)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part Six or R.C.
Title XXIX that involves a physical or mental wound, injury, disability or
condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect of a child
under 18 years of age or of a mentally retarded, developmentally disabled, or
physically impaired child under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (j)   As used in this section, "peace officer" has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2935.01.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
§ 606.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person's liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the section defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the section defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense.  When the section neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, recklessness is sufficient culpability to commit the offense.
   (c)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Culpability."  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   "Intoxication."  Includes but is not limited to intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   "Involuntary acts."  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor's volition are "involuntary acts".
      (4)   "Possession."  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor's control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 606.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is his or her specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is his or her specific intention to engage in conduct of
that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of his or her purpose, when he or
she is aware that his or her conduct will probably cause a certain result or
will probably be of a certain nature.  A person has knowledge of circumstances
when he or she is aware that the circumstances probably exist.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, he or she perversely disregards a known risk that his or her
conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of a certain
nature.  A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless
indifference to the consequences, he or she perversely disregards a known risk
that the circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, he or she fails to perceive or avoid a risk that his or her conduct
may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.  A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, he or she fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element.  When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element.  When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.09  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
his or her office or employment, except that if the section defining the
offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the
organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable,
the provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
his or her office or employment, except that if the section defining the
offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the
organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable,
the provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of his or her office or employment.
   (b)   When strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.  This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, "organization" means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, estate, trust or other commercial or legal entity. 
"Organization" does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental
agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 606.10  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. §
2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by the organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in that
conduct, or tolerates that conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and the duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 606.11  ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit
an offense.  An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted.  In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. 
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  An attempt
to commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense
under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to division (e)
(1) of this section for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in
violation of division (a) of this section, if the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall impose upon the
offender a class two suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or
nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to attempted rape and
also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described
in R.C. § 2941.1418, § 2941.1419 or § 2941.1420, the offender shall be
sentenced to a prison term or term of life imprisonment pursuant to R.C. §
2971.03.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Drug abuse offense." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   "Motor vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
§ 606.12  COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
§ 606.13  SELF DEFENSE; LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, "residence" and "vehicle" have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person who lawfully is in that person's residence has no duty to
retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another, or defense of
that person's residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant of that
person's vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by an
immediate family member of the person has no duty to retreat before using force
in self defense or defense of another.
(R.C. § 2901.09) 
CHAPTER 608:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICES
Section
   
608.01   Falsification
   
608.02   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
608.03   Compounding a crime
   
608.04   Failure to report a crime or death
   
608.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
608.06   Obstructing official business
   
608.07   Obstructing justice
   
608.08   Resisting arrest
   
608.09   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
   
608.10   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
608.11   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
608.12   Dereliction of duty
   
608.13   Interfering with civil rights
   
608.14   Impersonating an officer
   
608.145   Using sham legal process
   
608.15   Display of law enforcement agency emblem
   
608.16   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
608.17   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
   
608.18   Failure to disclose personal information
   
608.19   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
608.20   Escape
   
608.21   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of detention
facility
Cross-reference:
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses, see §
666.15
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see §
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
678.05
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
648.06
   Penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 698
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Registration of dogs, see §
618.08
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see §
666.10
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see 
R.C. § 2935.10
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
§ 608.01  FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits; economic development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other
benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public
treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser's identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a County Recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a County
Sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a license to
carry a concealed handgun or is made in an affidavit submitted to a County
Sheriff to obtain a temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun
under R.C. § 2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person's purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser's identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a license to carry a concealed
handgun under R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a Sheriff a
fictitious or altered document that purports to be certification of the
person's competence in handling a handgun as described in R.C. § 2923.125(B)
(3).
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(13) or (a)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document with the purpose to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a
peace officer for proof of financial responsibility made in accordance with
R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
§ 608.02  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 608.03  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, § 2913.11, § 2913.21(B)(2) or § 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 608.04  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person who is a physician, limited practitioner, nurse or
other person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall negligently fail to
report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound that the person
treated or observed, or any serious physical harm to other persons that the
person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from an offense of
violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers a body or acquires the first knowledge of the
death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition from which
death at that time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer,
ambulance service, emergency squad or the coroner in a political subdivision in
which the body is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or
knowledge concerning the death is obtained.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, "burn injury" means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse or limited practitioner who, outside a
hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who
has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious
or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the
local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the
person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of those actions.  Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding
evidence regarding a person's burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in
any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted pursuant to division
(e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, registered or licensed practical nurse, psychologist, social
worker, independent social worker, social work assistant, professional clinical
counselor or professional counselor who knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence as
defined in R.C. § 3113.31 shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for
it in the patient's or client's records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege
shall not be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report
containing the knowledge or belief noted pursuant to division (f)(1), and the
information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.
   (g)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client, doctor and patient, licensed psychologist or licensed
school psychologist and client, member of the clergy or rabbi or minister or
priest and any person communicating information confidentially to the member of
the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest for a religious counseling purpose in the
professional character of the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest,
husband and wife, or a communications assistant and those who are a party to a
telecommunications relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or § 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such by a person
seeking his or her aid or counsel.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of
drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital,
clinic, person, agency or organization certified pursuant to R.C. § 3793.06.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of
R.C. § 2907.02 or § 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in
violation of former R.C. § 2907.12.  As used in this division, "counseling
services" include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by
education or experience, is competent to provide those services.
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime.  Violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 608.05  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 608.06  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 608.07  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed.  The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Act of terrorism." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      (2)   "Adult" and "child." Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      (3)   "Delinquent child." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 608.08  RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest.  A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, "deadly weapon" has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
R.C. § 2911.01
§ 608.09  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (c)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender's conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender's
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this
section, the court shall impose a class two suspension from the range specified
in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an
offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331, the court shall impose a
class one suspension as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court shall not
grant limited driving privileges to the offender. No judge shall suspend the
first three years of suspension under a class two suspension of an offender's
license, permit or privilege required by this division or any portion of the
suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's license, permit or
privilege required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Moving violation." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      (2)   "Police officer." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A)-(C), (E), (F))
§ 608.10  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official's office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official's office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official's family or any of the public official's business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official's term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official's family or any of a public official's business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public official's
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official's becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official's family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee's office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee.  This participation does not constitute an unlawful interest
in a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract.  Violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Violation of
division (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official's family or any of the public official's business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official's family or any of the public official's business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Chief legal officer." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      (2)   "Public contract." Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
§ 608.11  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant's official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or business
use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 608.12  DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant's office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   As used in this section, "public servant" includes an officer or
employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 608.13  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person
of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
§ 608.14  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Federal law enforcement officer." An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   "Impersonate."  To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear
the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   "Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   "Peace officer."  A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this
state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority
under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement
officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans' home police officer
appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port
authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or § 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of
the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions,
upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or
certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred,
within limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol
trooper whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and
property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of
its political subdivisions.
      (5)   "Private police officer."  Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 608.145  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Lawfully issued."  Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   "Political subdivisions."  Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   "Sham legal process."  An instrument that meets all of the
following conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   "State."  A state of the United States, including without
limitation the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has
statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. "State" does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (b)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. 
A violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A)-(D))
§ 608.15  DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 608.16  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer's official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens' reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens' reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   The general types of expenditures made with amounts that
are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by the agency,
including the specific amount expended on each general type of expenditure,
except that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of
any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   If the Police Department, during any calendar year, has any
seized or forfeited property covered by this section in its custody, including
amounts distributed under R.C. § 2981.13 to its law enforcement trust fund or a
similar fund created for the State Highway Patrol, Department of Public Safety
or State Board of Pharmacy, the Police Department shall prepare a report
covering the calendar year that cumulates all of the information contained in
all of the public records kept by the Police Department pursuant to this
section for that calendar year. The Police Department shall send a copy of the
cumulative report to the Attorney General not later than the first day of March
in the calendar year following the calendar year covered by the report.
         C.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department's regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section and each report received by the Attorney
General is a public record open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or § 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Citizens' reward program." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
9.92.
         B.   "Law enforcement agency." Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   “Township law enforcement agency.” An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or § 4301.53 shall
be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol that the Division determines
to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates' industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more alcohol and drug addiction treatment programs that
are certified by the Department of Alcohol and Drug Addiction Services under
R.C. § 3793.06. A juvenile court shall not specify a program, except as
provided in this division, unless the program is in the same county as the
court or in a contiguous county. If no certified program is located in any of
those counties, the juvenile court may specify a certified program anywhere in
Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be applied as provided in
division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens'
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens'
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens' reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality's population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens' reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens' reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 shall not be used to
pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. 
If the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 608.17  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Archival institution."  Any public or private building, structure
or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   "Audiovisual recording function" and "facility." Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      (3)   "Museum."  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   “Pretrial diversion program.”  Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner's or lessee's employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07.  An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
§ 608.18  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person's name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being or
is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person's name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person's name, address or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
§ 608.19  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, "9-1-1 system" means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 4931.40(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. §§ 4931.40 through 4931.70 to report an emergency if the
person knows that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. §§ 4931.40
through 4931.70, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of this
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Public Utilities
Commission. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that
information for the purpose of access to a database is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.
(R.C. § 4931.49(D)-(F))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4931.99(A), (C))
§ 608.20  ESCAPE.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Detention" means arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to
an arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. §§
2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401, or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in
this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction of a person
on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state
into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a
county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C.
§ 5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and going
to and from the work site.
      (2)   "Detention facility" means any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States.
   (b)   No person, knowing the person is under detention, other than
supervised release detention, or being reckless in that regard, shall purposely
break or attempt to break the detention, or purposely fail to return to
detention, either following temporary leave granted for a specific purpose or
limited period, or at the time required when serving a sentence in intermittent
confinement.
   (c)   No person, knowing the person is under supervised release detention or
being reckless in that regard, shall purposely break or attempt to break the
supervised release detention or purposely fail to return to the supervised
release detention, either following temporary leave granted for a specific
purpose or limited period, or at the time required when serving a sentence in
intermittent confinement.
   (d)   Irregularity in bringing about or maintaining detention, or lack of
jurisdiction of the committing or detaining authority, is not a defense to a
charge under this section if the detention is pursuant to judicial order or in
a detention facility. In the case of any other detention, irregularity or lack
of jurisdiction is an affirmative defense only if either of the following
occurs:
      (1)   The escape involved no substantial risk of harm to the person or
property of another.
      (2)   The detaining authority knew or should have known there was no
legal basis or authority for the detention.
   (e)   No person shall fail to return to detention at a specified time
following temporary leave granted for a specific purpose or limited period or
at the time required when serving a sentence in intermittent confinement.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section of guilty of escape.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 19-2017, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 608.21  ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility any of the following items:
      (1)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (2)   Any tobacco products, as defined in R.C. § 2927.02.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the item to the
confined person or the prisoner, and that either of the following applies:
      (1)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
      (2)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other place
to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal conveyance, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Detention" means arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to
an arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. §§
2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401, or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in
this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction of a person
on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state
into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a
county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C.
§ 5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and going
to and from the work site.
      (2)    "Detention facility" means any public or private place used for
the confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this
state or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or
found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States.
(Ord. 20-2017, passed 8-7-2017)
CHAPTER 612:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
612.01   Definitions
   
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
   
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons
   
612.04   Consumption in motor vehicle
   
612.05   Permit required
   
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs
   
612.07   Open container prohibited
   
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption
   
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities
   
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
   
612.11   Public consumption
   
612.12   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.04
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Control Law, see R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see R.C. § 4303.29
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
§ 612.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Alcohol."  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The
term does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   "At retail."  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for
resale.
   (c)   "Beer."  Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part
from malt products and containing 0.5% or more, but not more than 12%, of
alcohol by volume.
   (d)   "Cider."  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound,
ripe apples, including without limitation flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   (e)   "Club."  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for those
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   "Community facility."  Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   (g)   "Controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet."  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages or food may be sold.
   (h)   "Hotel."  The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   (i)   "Intoxicating liquor" and "liquor."  All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or
patented.  "Intoxicating liquor" and "liquor" include wine even if it contains
less than 4% of alcohol by volume, mixed beverages even if they contain less
than 4% of alcohol by volume, cider, alcohol and all solids and confections
which contain any alcohol.
   (j)   "Low-alcohol beverage."  Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   (k)   "Manufacture."  All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   (l)   "Manufacturer."  Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   "Mixed beverages."  Bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails and
highballs, produced by mixing any type of whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin
or other distilled spirits with, or over, carbonated or plain water, pure
juices from flowers and plants, and other flavoring materials.  The completed
product shall contain not less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than
21% of alcohol by volume.
   (n)   "Nightclub."  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   "Person."  Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   "Pharmacy."  An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
R.C. § 4729.27.
   (q)   "Restaurant."  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place.  The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   (r)   "Sale" and "sell."  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21.  These terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   (s)   "Sales area or territory." An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries.  "Sales area or territory"
does not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive
geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit
holder before April 9, 2001.
   (t)   "Sealed container."  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.
   (u)   "Spirituous liquor."  All intoxicating liquors containing more than
21% of alcohol by volume.
   (v)   "Vehicle."  All means of transportation by land, by water or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for the transportation.
   (w)   "Wholesale distributor" and "distributor."  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (x)   "Wine."  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume,
which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural
products.  Except as provided in R.C. § 4301.01(B)(3), the term does not
include cider.
(R.C. § 4301.01)
§ 612.02  SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician's practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian.  In proceedings before the Liquor Control
Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder,
charged with a violation of this division shall be charged, for the same
offense, with a violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor.  An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts
or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place.  No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. 
The prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician's practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program.  A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division.  If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child's record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358.  If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section.  If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.52.  If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, § 4301.633 or § 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Drug of abuse." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   "Hotel." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      (3)   "Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs" and
"prescription." Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (4)   "Minor." A person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   "Underage person." A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (j)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (l)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500  nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (m)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d), (e)(1), (f), (g) or (j) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If an offender
who violates division (e)(1) of this section was under the age of 18 years at
the time of the offense and the offense occurred while the offender was the
operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any
other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's license for a period of
six months.  If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has
not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months.  If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court.  The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (o)   (1)   Whoever violates division (k) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months.  The court also shall impose a class six suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the
court may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the
offender attains the age of 21 years.  The court also may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service
the offender shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04  CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver's license or driver's license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year.  If the offender is 15 years
and six months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary instruction
permit or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not be eligible to
be issued such a license or permit for a period of six months.  If the offender
has not attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender shall not be
eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender attains
the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 Code or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06  POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
      Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
      Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume in any
public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to imprisonment up
to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
      Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of
the permit holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Chauffeured limousine." A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   "Street," "highway," and "motor vehicle." Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a state
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, on the premises
of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section, while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section, while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-
5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2, F-5,
F-7 or F-8 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit or wine served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued.  As used in this division (c)(2), "music festival" means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person's possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   "Orchestral performance."  A concert comprised of a group of
not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center.” An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending an orchestral performance and the holder of the F-9 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(5) of this section, “orchestral
performance” has the same meaning as in division (c)(3)B. of this section.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2, D-2X,
D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5G, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, G or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5I, D-5J, or D-7 permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(B))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09  CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health, the
Department of Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the Department
of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, with
written authorization of the person in charge of the detention facility or the
institution and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility
or the institution, office building or other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health or the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor's person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
§ 612.10  SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "underage person" means a person under 18
years of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (b) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court.  The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor upon any
street or other public way or upon any public land.
(Ord. 12-67, passed 8-7-1967)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1986 Code, § 529.09(b))
§ 612.12  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, "alcohol vaporizing device" means a machine
or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618:  ANIMALS
Section
   
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; dangerous and vicious dogs
   
618.02   Abandoning animals
   
618.03   Killing or injuring animals
   
618.04   Poisoning animals
   
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
   
618.07   Barking or howling dogs
   
618.08   Registration of dogs required
   
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog
   
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags
   
618.10   Unlawful tags
   
618.11   Animal bites; reports and quarantine
   
618.12   Hunting prohibited
   
618.13   Nuisance conditions prohibited
   
618.14   Impounding and disposition; records
   
618.15   Reporting escapes
   
618.16   Animal fights
   
618.17   Keeping of livestock
   
618.18   Location and care of barns, coops, pens or barnyard in proximity to
residences and businesses
   
618.19   Dead animals
   
618.20   Disposing of animal wastes
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog, see §
642.12
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway, see §§
404.05,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see §
660.04
Statutory reference:
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see R.C. § 715.23
§ 618.01  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Dangerous dog.” A dog that, without provocation, and subject to
the following sentence, has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion
or an apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise
endanger any person while that dog is off the premises of its owner, keeper or
harborer or some other responsible person, or not physically restrained or
confined in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure which has a top. “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog that
has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude
of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the
police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance
of their official duties.
      (2)   “Menacing fashion.” A dog that would cause any person being chased
or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      (3)   “Police dog.” A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (4)   “Vicious dog.”
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division B. of
this definition, meets any of the following criteria:
            1.   Has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
            2.   Has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to
any person, or has killed another dog;
            3.   Belongs to a breed that is commonly known as a pit bull dog.
The ownership, keeping, or harboring of such a breed of dog shall be prima
facie evidence of the ownership, keeping or harboring of a vicious dog.
         B.   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person or that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in
the performance of their official duties.
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog.
      (5)   “Without provocation.” A dog acts “without provocation” when it was
not teased, tormented, or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid
or the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity
and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
   (b)   A person who is the owner or has charge of any animal shall not permit
it to run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon
unenclosed land, or permit them to go upon any private yard, lot, or enclosure
without the consent of the owner of the yard, lot, or enclosure.
   (c)   No person shall cause animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the
purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or occupied by the owner
or keeper thereof without the consent of the owner of the premises.
   (d)   The running at large of such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in divisions (b) and (c) above is prima facie evidence that it is
running at large in violation of this section.
   (e)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
   (f)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision,
or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (g)   Except when a dangerous or vicious dog is lawfully engaged in hunting
or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper,
harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous
or vicious dog shall fail to do either of the following;
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer,
securely confine it all times in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced
yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top, except that a dangerous dog
may, in the alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is
adequately restrained.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, keep that dog on a chain- link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the
dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure that has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who
is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash
or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
   (h)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the
vicious dog.
   (i)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a vicious dog;
      (2)   Possess a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
divisions (j) of this section that the person's dog is not a vicious dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (j)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a vicious dog. The written waiver form shall include all of
the following:
      (1)   The veterinarian's license number and current business address;
      (2)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
      (3)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and gender of the
dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;
      (4)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner's
dog is not a vicious dog;
      (5)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any person from doing
any of the following:
         A.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows or
has reason to believe is a vicious dog;
         B.   Possessing a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         C.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person's dog is not a vicious dog or otherwise
provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (k)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(i) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (j) of this section and that attests that the
dog is not a vicious dog.
   (l)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (m)   (l)   Whoever violates divisions (e) or (f) of this section shall be
fined not less than $25 or more than $100 on a first offense; and on each
subsequent offense, shall be fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may
be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (m)(1) above,
if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (e) or (f) of this
section, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that
the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog
obedience training, or to do both.
   (n)   (l)   If a violation of division (g) of this section involves a
dangerous dog, whoever violates that division (g) is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree
on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the court may order the offender to
personally supervise the dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both,
and the court may order the offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to
division (h) of this section. The court in the alternative, may order the
dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the County
Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
      (2)   If a violation of division (g) of this section involves a vicious
dog, whoever violates that division (g) is guilty of one of the following:
         A.   On a first offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog
causes injury other than killing or serious injury to any person. The person
shall be guilty of a felony on each subsequent offense and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog
to be humanely destroyed by a licenses veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or
the County Humane Society.
         B.   A felony on a first or subsequent offense if the dog kills or
seriously injures a person and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Additionally, the court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed
by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane
Society.
   (o)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (p)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
(Ord. 16-2009, passed  6-1-2009; Ord. 19-2010, passed 9-7-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Animals running at large, see R.C. §§ 951.01, 951.02
   Confining, restraining, debarking dogs, see R.C. § 955.22
§ 618.02  ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(2))
§ 618.03  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another.  This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
§ 618.04  POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in that
capacity, to a  dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 618.05  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer.  This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter.  For the purpose of this
section, "shelter" means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor.  Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the Society or Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Companion animal." Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept.  "Companion animal"
does not include livestock or any wild animal.
         B.   "Cruelty," "torment," and "torture." Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1717.01.
         C.   "Federal Animal Welfare Act." The "Laboratory Animal Act of
1966", Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as
amended by the "Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560
(1970), the "Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90
Stat. 417 (1976), and the "Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99
Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         D.   "Practice of veterinary medicine." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4741.01.
         E.   "Residential dwelling." A structure or shelter or the portion of
a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         F.   "Wild animal." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the
companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient
quantities of good, wholesome food and water, or impound or confine the
companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement,
with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would
become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the
deprivation, confinement or impoundment or confinement in any of those
specified manners.
      (4)   Divisions (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section do not apply to any of
the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the Federal Animal Welfare Act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit
or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (e) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys to provide the training that is required for humane agents
under R.C. § 1717.06.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its
disposition, including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. 
If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the
proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with
regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of
the former owner.  The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be
paid to the former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (3)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person's ownership or care.  The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (d) of this section to reimburse an impounding
agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care
of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the
investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not
otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.
The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or
counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06  COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings.  No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored.  No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than six.  Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale or
other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices
that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall keep
adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 618.07  BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by the dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by the
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second complaint within 30 days, the
enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels or licensed animal
boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an assistance
dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.08  REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 618.09  HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.095  DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a registered
kennel, shall fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued
in connection with a certificate of registration.  A dog's failure at any time
to wear a valid tag shall be prima facie evidence of a lack of registration and
shall subject any dog found not wearing the tag to impoundment, sale or
destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.10  UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.11  ANIMAL BITES; REPORTS AND QUARANTINE.
   (a)   Whenever any person is bitten by a dog or other animal, report of the
bite shall be made to the Health Commissioner within 24 hours.  Whenever it is
reported to the Health Commissioner that any dog or cat has bitten a person,
that dog or cat shall be quarantined under an order issued by the Health
Commissioner.  The dog or cat shall be quarantined by its owner.  The dog or
cat shall be quarantined by its owner or by a harborer or shall be quarantined
in a pound or kennel.  In all cases, the quarantine shall be under the
supervision of the Health Commissioner and shall be at the expense of the owner
or harborer.  Quarantine shall continue until the Health Commissioner
determines that the dog or cat is not afflicted with rabies.  The quarantine
period hereby required shall not be less than ten days from the date on which
the person was bitten.  If at any time during the quarantine, the Health
Commissioner requires the dog or cat to be examined for symptoms of rabies,
then the examination shall be by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine.  The
veterinarian shall report to the Health Commissioner the conclusions reached as
a result of the examinations.  The examination by a veterinarian shall be at
the expense of the owner or harborer.  No dog or cat shall be released from the
required quarantine unless and until it has been properly vaccinated against
rabies.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section
or with any order of the Health Commissioner made pursuant thereto, nor fail to
immediately report to the Health Commissioner any symptoms or behavior
suggestive of rabies.
(1986 Code, § 505.10)
   (c)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under R.C. §
955.26.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
for each subsequent offense.
(1986 Code, § 505.16)
§ 618.12  HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is prohibited.
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit the killing of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be
killed by the Chief of Police using means for this killing which are also
authorized by the Chief.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.13  NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.14  IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every animal or dog
found in violation of §
618.01. If the dog is not wearing a valid registration tag and the owner is not
otherwise reasonably determined, notice shall be posted in the pound or animal
shelter both describing the dog and the place where it was seized and advising
the unknown owner that unless the dog is redeemed within three days, it may
thereafter be sold or destroyed according to law. If the dog is wearing a valid
registration tag or the identity of the owner, keeper or harborer is otherwise
reasonably determined, notice shall be given by certified mail to the owner,
keeper or harborer that the dog has been impounded and that unless it is
redeemed within 14 days of the date of the notice, it may thereafter be sold or
destroyed according to law.  Any dog seized and impounded may be redeemed by
its owner, keeper or harborer at any time prior to the applicable redemption
period upon payment of all lawful costs assessed against the animal and upon
providing the dog with a valid registration tag if it has none.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner's name and address where known, and a statement of any costs assessed
against the dog, shall be kept by any poundkeeper.
(1986 Code, § 505.02)
§ 618.15  REPORTING ESCAPES.
   (a)   The owner or keeper of any member of a species of the animal kingdom
that escapes from the owner's or keeper's custody or control and that is not
indigenous to this state or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons
or property, or both, shall, within one hour after the owner or keeper
discovers or reasonably should have discovered the escape, report it to:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer of the municipality and the County
Sheriff; and
      (2)   The Clerk of Council.
   (b)   If the office of the Clerk of Council is closed to the public at the
time a report is required by division (a) of this section, it is sufficient
compliance with division (a)(2) of this section if the owner or keeper makes
the report within one hour after the office is next open to the public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2927.21)
§ 618.16  ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall engage in or be employed at dogfighting, cockfighting,
bearbaiting or pitting an animal against another.  No person shall receive
money for the admission of another to a place kept for that purpose.  No person
shall use, train or possess any animal for seizing, detaining or maltreating a
domestic animal.  Any person who knowingly purchases a ticket of admission to
that place, or is present thereat, or witnesses the spectacle, is an aider and
abettor.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))  (1986 Code, § 505.14)
§ 618.17  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK.
   (a)   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any horse, pony, cattle,
sheep, hog, goat, llama, alpaca or other hoofed animal in the city, except that
the keeping, harboring or maintaining of any such animal may be located on one
acre or more.
   (b)   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any chicken, turkey, geese,
duck, pheasant, quail or other fowl in the city, except that the keeping,
harboring or maintaining of any such fowl may be located on one acre or more.
   (c)   Recognized agricultural education programs and projects such as FFA
and 4H are exempt from divisions (a) and (b) as long as the program or project
is supervised by school personnel or extension service personnel, housed on
school property, or housed on private property for a period less than one year
for the purpose of showing and selling at the county fair. Furthermore, persons
who depend upon livestock to supplement their incomes or diets are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b).
   (d)   Divisions (a) and (b) shall not apply to shows or exhibits duly
permitted and approved by the Police Department and/or Health Department as
part of a community event. However, no permit shall be approved where it is
proposed to offer the animals for sale.
   (e)   Persons currently owning, keeping, or harboring animals mentioned in
divisions (a) and (b) of this section shall have 180 days from the effective
date of this section to comply by moving the animals to appropriately-sized
parcels.
   (f)   No person shall raise or hatch any livestock mentioned in divisions
(a) and (b) in a residence or business where any person resides or works,
except that the business be solely an operation properly licensed and designed
for raising the livestock.
   (g)   No owner, keeper, harborer or person having charge of any livestock
shall allow the animal to escape or permit the animal to run at large on any
public thoroughfare or public land or any private premises. When made aware
that an animal has escaped, the owner, keeper, harborer or person having charge
of the animal must immediately catch and confine the animal.
   (h)   No owner, keeper, harborer or person having charge of any livestock
shall permit the animal to graze, scratch, dig or otherwise damage any lawn,
tree, shrub, plant, building or other public or private property other than the
property of the owner or person having charge of the animal. This section shall
not apply to private property onto which the owner or person having charge of
any animal has permission of the owner or occupier of the property authorizing
the entry of the animal onto the property.
   (i)   Complaints of improper nutrition, lacking veterinarian care, abuse or
neglect of any animal in this section will be investigated by the Health
Department, Police Department or County Humane Society and reported to the
proper authorities.
   (j)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Subsequent offenses shall be a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(1986 Code, § 505.17)  (Ord. 15-2009, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 618.18  LOCATION AND CARE OF BARNS, COOPS, PENS OR BARNYARD IN PROXIMITY TO
RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES.
   (a)   No person shall construct, use or maintain a barn, coop, pen or
barnyard within 50 feet of any occupied dwelling house or business, nor at any
place in such manner that the same becomes offensive or that the contents
thereof are discharged or run upon another's premises or into any street or
alley of the city.
   (b)   The areas where livestock are kept, including but not limited to
barns, coops, pens and barnyards, must be regularly cleaned to prevent insect,
rodent or vermin infestations and odors. Complaints will be investigated by the
Mayor, designated official or Health Commissioner. Findings and remedies will
be reported to proper authorities.
   (c)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Subsequent offenses shall be a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(1986 Code, § 505.18)  (Ord. 15-2009, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 618.19  DEAD ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or possessor of any animal which has died from disease or has
been killed shall permit the same to lie on any alley, street, lane or private
lot or premises within the city.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1986 Code, § 505.19)
§ 618.20  DISPOSING OF ANIMAL WASTES.
   (a)   No person shall deposit any manure from a stable, chicken coop or pen,
or swill, garbage or offensive substances, within 40 feet of any occupied
dwelling or place of business.
   (b)   No owner of any animal shall permit the animal to place waste upon
public land or upon the premises of another within the city.
   (c)   Any owner observing or learning of his or her animal placing waste
upon public land shall immediately remove the waste from the public land and
dispose of the waste in an enclosed container.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Animal." Any domestic animal, including but not limited to dogs,
horses and cats.
      (2)   "Owner." A person who harbors, keeps, controls or possesses an
animal.
      (3)   "Public land." Any and all property owned by the city, including
sidewalks, rights-of-way, streets and park land.
      (4)   "Waste." Fecal matter derived from animals.
   (e)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 21-89, passed 7-17-1989)
CHAPTER 624:  DRUGS
Section
   
624.01   Definitions
   
624.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana
   
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana
   
624.03   Drug possession offenses
   
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments
   
624.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
624.06   Use or possession of paraphernalia
   
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide
   
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles
   
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
624.09   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
624.10   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
624.11   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
624.12   Evidence
   
624.13   Double jeopardy
   
624.14   Controlled substance schedules
   
624.15   Pseudoephedrine sales
   
624.16   Prohibiting the use, possession, and sale of synthetic cannabinoids
and other synthetic drugs
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 612
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.17
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.03
Statutory reference:
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
§ 624.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   "Administer."  The direct application of a drug, whether by injection,
inhalation, ingestion or any other means to a person or an animal.
   (b)   "Adulterate."  To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C.
§ 3715.63.
   (c)   "Bulk amount."  Of a controlled substance, means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of marihuana,
cocaine, L.S.D., heroin and hashish and except as provided in division (2) or
(5) of this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide,
or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the "Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act" (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control
laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the "Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act" (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid.
   (d)   "Certified grievance committee."  A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (e)   "Cocaine."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or
derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt
of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (f)   "Committed in the vicinity of a juvenile."  An offense is "committed
in the vicinity of a juvenile" if the offender commits the offense within 100
feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (g)   "Committed in the vicinity of a school."  An offense is "committed in
the vicinity of a school" if the offender commits the offense on school
premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any
school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (h)   "Controlled substance." A drug, compound, mixture, preparation or
substance included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or
Schedule V of R.C. § 3719.41.
   (i)   “Controlled substance analog.”
      (1)   The phrase means, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition, a substance to which both of the following apply:
         A.   The chemical structure of the substance is substantially similar
to the structure of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
         B.   One of the following applies regarding the substance:
            1.   The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or
greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
            2.   With respect to a particular person, that person represents or
intends the substance to have a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than
the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following:
         A.   A controlled substance;
         B.   Any substance for which there is an approved new drug
application;
         C.   With respect to a particular person, any substance if an
exemption is in effect for investigational use for that person pursuant to
federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that substance is
pursuant to that exemption;
         D.   Any substance to the extent it is not intended for human
consumption before the exemption described in division (2)C. of this definition
takes effect with respect to that substance.
      (3)   A “controlled substance analog”, to the extent intended for human
consumption, shall be treated for purposes of any provision of this Code or the
Ohio Revised Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.
   (j)   “Counterfeit controlled substance.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (k)   "Cultivate."  Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (l)   "Dangerous drug."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:
         A.   Under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, is required to
bear a label containing the legend "Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing
without a prescription" or "Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by
or on the order of a licensed veterinarian" or any similar restrictive
statement, or may be dispensed only upon a prescription.
         B.   Under R.C. Chapter 3715 or Chapter 3719, may be dispensed only
upon a prescription.
      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance and that
is exempt from R.C.  Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply.
      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human
body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.
   (m)   "Deception." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (n)   "Disciplinary counsel." The disciplinary counsel appointed by the
Board of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court
under the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (o)   "Dispense."  To sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver.
   (p)   "Distribute."  To deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does not
include administering or dispensing a drug.
   (q)   "Drug."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any article recognized in the official United States
Pharmacopeia,National Formulary or any supplement intended for use in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in humans or
other animals.
      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in humans or other animals.
      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of the body of humans or other animals.
      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any article
specified in division (1), (2) or (3) above; but does not include devices or
their components, parts or accessories.
   (r)   "Drug abuse offense."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, § 2925.03, § 2925.04, § 2925.041, §
2925.05, § 2925.06, § 2925.11, § 2925.12, § 2925.13, § 2925.22, § 2925.23, §
2925.24, § 2925.31, § 2925.32, § 2925.36 or § 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality, state
or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2) or (3)
of this definition.
   (s)   "Drug dependent person."  Any person who, by reason of the use of any
drug of abuse, is physically and/or psychologically dependent upon the use of
that drug to the detriment of the person's health or welfare.
   (t)   "Drug of abuse."  Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant and
any dangerous drug, as defined in this section.
   (u)   "Federal drug abuse control laws."  The "Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970", 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.
   (v)   "Felony drug abuse offense."  Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United
States.
   (w)   "Harmful intoxicant."  Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor,
but means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (x)   "Hashish."  The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract or
liquid distillate form.
   (y)   "Hypodermic."  A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or
device for the injection of medication.
   (z)   "Juvenile."  A person under 18 years of age.
   (aa)   "Laboratory."  A laboratory approved by the State Board of Pharmacy
as proper to be entrusted with the custody of controlled substances and the use
of controlled substances for scientific and clinical purposes and for purposes
of instruction.
   (bb)   "Lawful prescription." A prescription that is issued for a legitimate
medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of
deception or by the commission of any theft offense.
   (cc)   "Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs" or
"prescriber."  An individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or
dangerous drugs or drug therapy related devices in the course of the
individual's professional practice, including only the following:
      (1)   A dentist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4715.
      (2)   A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife or certified
nurse practitioner who holds a certificate to prescribe issued under R.C. §
4723.48.
      (3)   An optometrist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4725 to practice
optometry under a therapeutic pharmaceutical agents certificate.
      (4)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery.
      (5)   A physician assistant who holds a certificate to prescribe issued
under R.C. Chapter 4730.
      (6)   A veterinarian licensed under R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (dd)   "L.S.D."  Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (ee)   "Major drug offender."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ff)   "Mandatory prison term."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (gg)   "Manufacture."  To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare
or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
   (hh)   "Manufacturer."  A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as
"manufacture" is defined by this section.
   (ii)   "Marihuana."  All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether
growing or not; the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a
part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or
resin.  "Marihuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or
cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. 
"Marihuana" does not include "hashish".
   (jj)   "Methamphetamine." Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (kk)   "Minor drug possession offense."  Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (ll)   "Official written order."  An order written on a form provided for
that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision for the
order, if the order forms are authorized and required by federal law.
   (mm)   "Person."  Any individual, corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association
or other legal entity.
   (nn)   "Pharmacist."  A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in
the practice of pharmacy.
   (oo)   "Pharmacy."  Except when used in a context that refers to the
practice of pharmacy, means any area, room, rooms, place of business,
department or portion of any of the foregoing, where the practice of pharmacy
is conducted.
   (pp)   "Possess" or "possession."  Having control over a thing or substance
but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance
through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or
substance is found.
   (qq)   "Prescription."  A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or
combination or mixtures of drugs to be used by a particular individual or for
treating a particular animal, issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.
   (rr)   "Presumption for a prison term" or "presumption that a prison term
shall be imposed."  A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a
prison term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   (ss)   "Professional license."  Any license, permit, certificate,
registration, qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit,
temporary certificate or temporary registration that is described in R.C. §
2925.01(W)(1) to (W)(36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally
licensed person.
   (tt)   "Professionally licensed person."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of controlled
substances or a wholesaler of controlled substances under R.C. Chapter 3719;
      (2)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (3)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (4)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (5)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (6)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (7)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist's license, hair
designer's license, manicurist's license, esthetician's license, natural hair
stylist's license, managing cosmetologist's license, managing hair designer's
license, managing manicurist's license, managing esthetician's license,
managing natural hair stylist's license, cosmetology instructor's license, hair
design instructor's license, manicurist instructor's license, esthetics
instructor's license, natural hair style instructor's license, independent
contractor's license or tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (9)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious intravenous sedation permit, a limited
resident's license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist's license or
a dental hygienist's teacher's certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (10)   A person who has been issued an embalmer's license, a funeral
director's license, a funeral home license or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer's or funeral director's apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (12)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (14)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (15)   A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs or a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
under R.C. Chapter 4729;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a certificate to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, a limited branch of medicine or
podiatry under R.C. Chapter 4731;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school psychologist under
R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under R.C. Chapter
4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer's
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer's or fitter's
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B or class C license
or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard employee under
R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a nursing home
administrator under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a professional clinical counselor or
professional counselor, licensed as a social worker or independent social
worker, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   (uu)   "Public premises." Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort.
   (vv)   "Sale." Includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer or gift, or
offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   (ww)   "Sample drug."  A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (xx)   "Schedule I, II, III, IV or V."  Controlled substance Schedules I,
II, III, IV and V established pursuant to R.C. § 3719.41, as amended pursuant
to R.C. § 3719.43 or § 3719.44.
   (yy)   "School."  Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed.
   (zz)   "School building."  Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (aaa)   "School premises."  Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   (bbb)   "Standard Pharmaceutical Reference Manual."  The current edition,
with cumulative changes if any, of any of the following reference works:
      (1)   The National Formulary.
      (2)   The United States Pharmacopeia, prepared by the authority of the
United States Pharmacopeia Convention, Inc.
      (3)   Other standard references that are approved by the State Board of
Pharmacy.
   (ccc)   "Theft offense." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (ddd)   "Unit dose."  An amount or unit or a compound, mixture or
preparation containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable
and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the
controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (eee)   "Wholesaler."  A person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes "wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs", which means a person engaged in the sale of
dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that person
authorized by that person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at
wholesale.
(R.C. §§ 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01)
§ 624.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance;
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution or distribute a controlled substance, when the offender knows or
has reasonable cause to believe that the controlled substance is intended for
sale or resale by the offender or another person.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act" (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered
for sale, prescribed, dispensed or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section, if
the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in
marihuana is a minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree upon a subsequent offense.
      (3)   If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana and
if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of
a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (c)
of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through
2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section shall do all of the following
that are applicable regarding the offender:
      (1)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than
five years the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of any person
who is convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a violation of this section.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21 and
except as provided in R.C. § 2925.03(H), the Clerk of the Court shall pay any
mandatory fine imposed pursuant to this section and any fine other than a
mandatory fine that is imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.18(A) or (B)(5) to the county, township, municipality, park district, as
created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or § 1545.04, or state law enforcement
agencies in this state that primarily were responsible for or involved in
making the arrest of, and in prosecuting, the offender.  However, the Clerk
shall not pay a mandatory fine so imposed to a law enforcement agency unless
the agency has adopted a written internal control policy under division (e)(2)
of this section that addresses the use of the fine moneys that it receives.
Each agency shall use the mandatory fines so paid to subsidize the agency's law
enforcement efforts that pertain to drug offenses, in accordance with the
written internal control policy adopted by the recipient agency under division
(e)(2) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Prior to receiving any fine moneys under division (e)(1) of
this section or R.C. § 2925.42(B), a law enforcement agency shall adopt a
written internal control policy that addresses the agency's use and disposition
of all fine moneys so received and that provides for the keeping of detailed
financial records of the receipts of those fine moneys, the general types of
expenditures made out of those fine moneys, and the specific amount of each
general type of expenditure.  The policy shall not provide for or permit the
identification of any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing
investigation.  All financial records of the receipts of those fine moneys, the
general type of expenditures made out of those fine moneys, and the specific
amount of each general type of expenditure by an agency are public records open
for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.  Additionally, a written internal control
policy adopted under this division is such a public record, and the agency that
adopted it shall comply with it.
         B.   Each law enforcement agency that receives in any calendar year
any fine moneys under division (e)(1) of this section or R.C. § 2925.42(B)
shall prepare a report covering the calendar year that cumulates all of the
information contained in all of the public financial records kept by the agency
pursuant to division (e)(2)A. of this section for that calendar year, and shall
send a copy of the cumulative report, no later than the first day of March in
the calendar year following the calendar year covered by the report, to the
Attorney General.  Each report received by the Attorney General is a public
record open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   For the purpose of division (e) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   "Law enforcement agencies." Includes but is not limited to the
State Board of Pharmacy and the office of a prosecutor.
         B.   "Prosecutor." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (f)   As used in this section, "drug" includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.
(R.C. § 2925.03)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)
§ 624.025  CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (c)
of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through
2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section shall do all of the following
that are applicable regarding the offender:
      (1)   The court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit in accordance with R.C. § 2925.03(G). If an
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit is suspended in
accordance with that division, the offender may request termination of, and the
court may terminate, the suspension in accordance with that division.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person's
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04)
§ 624.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
      (4)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4),
and (c)(5), if the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II of R.C. §
3719.41, or is cocaine, L.S.D., heroin or a compound, mixture or preparation
containing such drugs, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V of R.C. §
3719.41, whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession
of drugs.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division,
possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing hashish, whoever violates division
(a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish.  The penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   As used in this division, “spice” means 1-Pentyl-3-(1-
naphthoyl)indole, 1-Butyl-3- (1-naphthoyl)indole, 1-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-
(1-naphthoyl)indole, 5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-
phenol, or 5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol. If
the drug involved is spice or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
containing spice, whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
possession of spice, a minor misdemeanor.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person's
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24 and
2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in addition
to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this section or
R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (a) of
this section shall do the following if applicable regarding the offender:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk
of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
      (2)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than
five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit.
      (3)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04  POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six months
nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 624.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony, and punishable under appropriate
state law, if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a violation of R.C.
§ 2925.02 or § 2925.03.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (c)
of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through
2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section shall do all of the following
that are applicable regarding the offender:
      (1)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than
five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of
Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13)
§ 624.06  USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use or designed for use in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.  "Drug
paraphernalia" includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of, a controlled substance.
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured
metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion
mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a
marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe;
electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925.  A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use,
drug paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.  This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
   (e)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six months
nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit.  If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court shall
immediately comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
§ 624.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six months
nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit.  If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 624.073  IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The person shall require the purchaser
to sign the card and provide a complete residence address.  The person
dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card.  The
person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date
of the transaction.  The person shall maintain the cards at the person's
business address and make them available during normal business hours for
inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy
or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate
violations of this code, R.C. Chapter 2925, Chapter 3719 or Chapter 4729, or
federal drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to record each transaction
shall inform the purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning:  "Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food.  Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21.  Do not inhale contents. 
Misuse can be dangerous to your health."
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 624.076  POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "motor vehicle," "street" and "highway" have
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
§ 624.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II of R.C. §
3719.41 with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V of R.C. § 3719.41, or is marihuana, the penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (c)
of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through
2929.18, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section shall do both of the
following:
      (1)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than
five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of
Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of
Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G), (M))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H)-(K)
§ 624.10  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler sells a controlled substance in a package the wholesaler has
prepared, the manufacturer or wholesaler shall securely affix to each package
in which the controlled substance is contained a label showing in legible
English the name and address of the vendor and the quantity, kind and form of
controlled substance contained therein.  No person, except a pharmacist for the
purpose of dispensing a controlled substance upon a prescription, shall alter,
deface or remove any label so affixed.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or § 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or Schedule II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if
the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C.
§ 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 624.11  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person's profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of
this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent
any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, § 3719.06, §
3719.13, § 3719.172(B) or § 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.12  EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or
established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the
alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to
the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie
evidence of the content, identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer's regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer's education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section.  The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused's attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused's attorney's receipt of the report.  The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of
the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court.  The portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused's analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances.  The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial.  If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused's analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused's attorney.  In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused's privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925
or Chapter 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused's choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation.  Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 624.13  DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.14  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
Statutory reference:
   For comprehensive lists of drugs identified under each of the following
Schedules, see R.C. § 3719.41, as amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44:
   Schedule I
   (a)   Narcotics - opiates
   (b)   Narcotics - opium derivatives
   (c)   Hallucinogens
   (d)   Depressants
   (e)   Stimulants
   Schedule II
   (a)   Narcotics - opium and opium derivatives
   (b)   Narcotics - opiates
   (c)   Stimulants
   (d)   Depressants
   (e)   Hallucinogenic substances
   (f)   Immediate precursors
   Schedule III
   (a)   Stimulants
   (b)   Depressants
   (c)   Narcotic antidotes
   (d)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations
   (e)   Anabolic steroids
   (f)   Hallucinogenic substances
   Schedule IV
   (a)   Narcotic drugs
   (b)   Depressants
   (c)   Fenfluramine
   (d)   Stimulants
   (e)   Other substances
   Schedule V
   (a)   Narcotic drugs
   (b)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations
   (c)   Stimulants
§ 624.15  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Consumer product." Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   "Pseudoephedrine." Any material, compound, mixture or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         C.   "Pseudoephedrine product." A consumer product consisting of a
single-ingredient preparation of pseudoephedrine in which pseudoephedrine is
the active ingredient. "Pseudoephedrine product" does not include either of the
following:
            1.   A consumer product containing pseudoephedrine that is in a
liquid, liquid capsule or gel capsule form;
            2.   A consumer product primarily intended for administration to
children under 12 years of age, according to the label instructions, in solid
dosage form, including chewable tablets, when individual dosage units do not
exceed 15 milligrams of pseudoephedrine.
         D.   "Retailer." A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         E.   "Single-ingredient preparation." A compound, mixture, preparation
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         F.   "Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs." Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive or otherwise
acquire more than nine grams of any pseudoephedrine product within a period of
30 consecutive days, unless the pseudoephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, Chapter 4715, Chapter 4723, Chapter 4729,
Chapter 4731 or Chapter 4741.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than nine grams of any pseudoephedrine
product within a period of 30 consecutive days if the individual is an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee
receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs the pseudoephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with
manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading
of the product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, unless the
pseudoephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, Chapter
4715, Chapter 4723, Chapter 4729, Chapter 4731 or Chapter 4741.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product to that individual and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter
3719, Chapter 4715, Chapter 4723, Chapter 4729, Chapter 4731 or Chapter 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual's parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product to that individual if the individual is an
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs and the
individual receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product in a sealed container in connection
with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or
unloading of the product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual's name, age or other identification
for the purpose of purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring a
pseudoephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of division (e)(3)C. of this section.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product, a delinquent act that
would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be committed by an
adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver or otherwise provide to any individual within a
period of 30 consecutive days an amount of pseudoephedrine product that is
greater than nine grams.
         B.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any quantity
of pseudoephedrine product dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, Chapter
4715, Chapter 4723, Chapter 4729, Chapter 4731 or Chapter 4741.
         C.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than nine grams of any pseudoephedrine product
within a period of 30 consecutive days if the individual is an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives
or accepts from the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or
employee the pseudoephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with
manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading
of the product.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product to an
individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, Chapter 4715, Chapter 4723, Chapter 4729,
Chapter 4731 or Chapter 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual's parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product to
an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product in a sealed container
to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing, warehousing,
placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading of the product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of division (e)(3)B. of this section.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product to a minor, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (d) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Card holder." Any person who presents a driver's or commercial
driver's license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product from the
seller, agent or employee.
         B.   Identification card" and "transaction scan device." Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   "Seller." A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   "Transaction scan." The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver's or commercial driver's license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product to the person presenting the
document from using a transaction scan device to check the validity of a
document other than a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that
may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver's
or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product transaction scan, and
the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each
violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the
County Treasurer for deposit into the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver's or commercial driver's license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver's or
commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer's duties.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (f) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   "Drug," "licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs," "pharmacy," "prescriber," "prescription," and "terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs." Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         B.   "Pharmacist." A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
         C.   "Proof of age." A driver's license, a commercial driver's
license, a military identification card, a passport or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         D.   "Wholesaler." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product to the public shall do all of the following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products from other merchandise so that
no member of the public may procure or purchase the products without the direct
assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized employee of the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product is sold or
otherwise provided:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   Make a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual
purchases or receives more than nine grams of pseudoephedrine products within a
period of 30 consecutive days.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product purchases, in
accordance with division (e)(3) of this section.
      (3)   A.   As used in this division (e)(3), "law enforcement official"
means an officer or employee of any agency or authority of the United States, a
state, a territory, a political division of a state or territory, or an Indian
tribe, who is empowered by the law to investigate or conduct an official
inquiry into a potential violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation
of law.
         B.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product to the public shall maintain a log book of all
purchases of pseudoephedrine products. The log book may be maintained in a
tangible format, in an electronic format, or in both a tangible format and an
electronic format. As part of this requirement, the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs shall do all of the following:
            1.   Require each purchaser to sign an entry in the log book that
is maintained in the electronic or tangible format;
            2.   Determine whether the name signed in the entry in the log book
corresponds with the name on a government-issued identification card;
            3.   Retain the log book in a tangible format, in an electronic
format, or in both a tangible format and an electronic format for a minimum of
one year after the date of the last purchase recorded in the log book;
            4.   Include in the log book in the manner described in division
(e)(3)E. of this section or, in the alternative, post, in a conspicuous
location, the following statement:
      "Ohio law prohibits the over-the-counter purchase within any period of 30
consecutive days of more than nine grams of any consumer product in which
pseudoephedrine is the only active ingredient. If you purchase a consumer
product in which pseudoephedrine is the only active ingredient, you are
required to sign a log book that may be accessible to law enforcement officers
and to provide a government-issued identification card to verify your identity.
Except in limited circumstances, the purchase within any period of 30
consecutive days of more than nine grams of any consumer product in which
pseudoephedrine is the only active ingredient, and the purchase by any
individual under 18 years of age of any consumer product in which
pseudoephedrine is the only active ingredient, are subject to criminal
prosecution or delinquency proceedings in accordance with Ohio law. Also, the
provision of false information concerning an individual's name, age or other
identification for the purpose of acquiring any consumer product in which
pseudoephedrine is the only active ingredient is subject to criminal
prosecution or delinquency proceedings in accordance with Ohio law."
         C.   Each purchaser of a pseudoephedrine product shall do all of the
following:
            1.   Sign and print the purchaser's name and address in the log
book;
            2.   Provide a government-issued identification card to the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs to verify the purchaser's
identity.
         D.   Information contained in the log book may not be used or
disclosed except in the following circumstances:
            1.   In response to a court order or subpoena;
            2.   In response to a request from a law enforcement official to be
used for law enforcement purposes.
         E.   If a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs chooses
to include the statement set forth in division (e)(3)B.4. of this section in
the log book maintained under division (e)(3)B. of this section, the statement
shall be set forth in the following manner:
            1.   If the log book is maintained in an electronic format, the
statement shall be set forth in such a manner that it is presented on the
viewing screen to each purchaser who is signing an entry in the log book before
the purchaser may sign the entry.
            2.   If the log book is maintained in a tangible format, the
statement shall be set forth on the cover of the log book and on each page of
the log book.
      (4)   Prescriptions, orders and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products shall be open for inspection to
federal, state, county and municipal officers and employees of the State Board
of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws of this state or of the United
States relating to controlled substances. The prescriptions, orders, records
and stocks shall be open for inspection by the State Medical Board and its
employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 624.16  PROHIBITING THE USE, POSSESSION, AND SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS.
   (a)   The following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the
context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
      (1)   "Synthetic cannabinoids" means any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation containing any detectable quantity of synthetically produced
cannabinoids, their salts, isomers and salts of isomer, unless specifically
excepted elsewhere in this section. Since nomenclature of these synthetically
produced cannabinoids are not internationally standardized and may continually
evolve, these structures or compounds of these structures shall be included
under this division, regardless of their specific numerical designation of
atomic positions covered, so long as it can be determined through some form of
scientific testing or analysis that the substance contains properties that fit
within one or more of the following categories:
         A.   “Tetrahydrocannabinoids.”  Meaning tetrahydrocannabinols
naturally contained in a plant of the genus Cannabis (cannabinoids plant), as
well as synthetic equivalents of the substances contained in the plant, or in
the plant, or in the resinous extractives of Cannabis, sp. and/or synthetic
substances, derivatives, and their isomers with similar chemical structure and
pharmacological activity such as the following: Delta 6 cis or trans
tetrahydrocannabinol, and their optical isomers Delta 3,4 cis or trans
tetrahydrocannabinol, and its optical isomers. (Since nomenclature of these
substances is not internationally standardized, compounds of these structures,
regardless of numerical designation of atomic positions covered.)
         B.   “Naphthoylindoles.”  Any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)
indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by a
alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkymenthyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-
piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further
substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in
the naphthyl ring to any extent.
         C.   “Naphthylmethylindoles.”  Any compound containing a 1H-indol-3-
yl-(1-naphthyl) methane structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the
indole ring by a alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl,
1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group whether or
not further substitution in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not
further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not
substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.
         D.   “Naphthylmethylindenes.”  Any compound containing 3-(1-naphthoyl)
pyrrole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by
a alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-
piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group whether or not further
substituted in the pyrrole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in
the naphthyl ring to any extent.
         E.   “Naphthylmethylindenes.”  Any compound containing a
naphthylideneindene structure with substitution at the 3-position of the indene
ring by a alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-
methyl-2-piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group whether or not
substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the
naphthyl ring to any extent.
         F.   “Phenylacetylindoles.”  Any compound containing a 3-
phenylacetylindole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the
indole ring by a alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl,
l-(N-methyl-2-piperdinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group whether or
not further substitution in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not
substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.
         G.   “Cyclohexylphenols.”  Any compound containing a 2-(3-
hydroxycyclohexyl) phenol structure with substitution at the 5-position of the
phenolic ring by a alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl,
cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl
group whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.
         H.   “Benzoylindoles.”  Any compound containing a 3-(benzoyl) indole
structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by a alkyl,
haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-
piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl group whether or not further
substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in
the phenyl ring to any extent.
         I.   2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3- (4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo [1,2,3,de]-
1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl—1- napthalenylmethanone. Some trade or other names: WIN
55,212-2.
         J.   “Dibenzopyrans.”  Including but not limited to (6a,7,10,10a-
tetrahydrobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol. Some trade or other names: HU-210, JWH-051,
JWH-139, JWH-161, JWH-229 and JWH-359.
         K.   PB-22 (1-pentyl-8-quinolinyl ester-1H-indole-3-carboxylic acid).
         L.   5-fluoro PB-22 (8-quinolinyl ester-1-(5-flouropentyl)-1H-indole-
3-carboxylic acid).
         M.   BB-22 (1-cyclohexylmethyl)-8-quinolinyl ester-1H-indole-3-
carboxylic acid).
   These products include, but are not limited to being contained in
preparations such as incense, potpourri, plant fertilizers, insect repellant
and are marketed with brand names including but not limited to K2, K3, K4,
Spice and Spike.
      (2)   "Substituted cathinones" means any compound (except bupropion),
mixture, or preparation structurally derived from 2-aminopropan-1-one by
substitution at the 1-position with either phenyl, naphthyl, or thiophene ring
systems, whether or not the compound is modified in any of the following ways,
that is to say:
         A.   By substitution in the ring system to any extent with alkyl,
alkylenedioxy, alkoxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not
further substituted in the ring system by one or more other univalent
substituents;
         B.   By substitution at the 3-position with an acyclic alkyl
substituent;
         C.   By substitution at the 2-amino nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl,
benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups, or by inclusion of the 2-amino nitrogen atom
in a cyclic structure.
   These include but are not limited to 3.4-Methylenedipxypyrovalerone (MDPV),
4-methylmethcathinone (mephedrone, 4-MMC), 4-fluoromethcathinone (flephedrone),
3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone (methylone), butylone, and naphyrone. These
compounds are often found in a class of novelty products commonly sold as "bath
salts". These substances are sold with trade names including but not limited to
MDPK, Magic, Super Coke, PV, POSH, Cloud 9, Ivory Wave, Ocean, Charge Plus,
White Lightning, Scarface, Hurricane Charlie, Vanilla Sky, Bonzai Grow, Blue
Silk, Serenity Now, Lovely Dovey, Euphoria, Aura, Red Dove and White Dove.
      (3)   "Manufacture" means the production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic
drugs, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural
origin, or independently by means of chemical syntheses, and includes any
packaging or repackaging of synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic drugs or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic cannabinoids or
synthetic drugs as an incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical
analysis and not for sale.
      (4)   "Person" means by individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership or association, or any other entity.
      (5)   "Possession." Possession may be either actual or constructive:
         A.   “Actual possession” means exercising physical dominion
         B.   “Constructive possession” may be inferred if the defendant has
intent and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cannabinoids,
synthetic drug or drug paraphernalia.
      (6)   "Produce or production" means planting, cultivating, tending or
harvesting.
      (7)   "Sale" means delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or
offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
         A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or under any
circumstances where one reasonably should know, to sell, give, exchange, or
otherwise distribute to any persons any product containing the substances
included in the definition of synthetic cannabinoids or substituted cathinones.
         B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, or under any
circumstances where one reasonably should know, to display for sale or possess
with intent to distribute any product containing the substances included in the
definition of “synthetic cannabinoids” or “substituted cathinones”.
         C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body any
product containing the substances included in the definition of “synthetic
cannabinoids” or “substituted cathinones”.
         D.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using, possessing, or
selling synthetic cannabinoids or other synthetic drugs, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord.18-2011, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 18-2013, passed 4-15-2013)
CHAPTER 625: PROHIBITION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSING,
CULTIVATION, AND RETAIL DISTRIBUTION WITHIN THE CITY
Section
   
625.01   Definitions
   
625.02   Cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana
prohibited
§ 625.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Academic medical center” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4731.297.
   (f)   “Cultivate” has the same meaning as found in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (g)   “Dispense” has the same meaning as found in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (e)   “Manufacture” has the same meaning as found in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (b)   “Marijuana” has the same meaning as defined in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (c)   “Medical marijuana” has the same meaning as found in R.C. § 3796.01.
   (d)   “State university” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3345.011.
(Ord. 31-2018, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 625.02  CULTIVATION, PROCESSING, OR RETAIL DISPENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The cultivation, manufacture, or retail dispensing of medical
marijuana within the City of Shelby is prohibited.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit research related to marijuana at a
state university, academic medical center, or private research and development
organizations as part of a research protocol as approved by an institutional
review board or equivalent entity, if otherwise permitted by state law or rule,
or local ordinance.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 31-2018, passed 1-7-2019)
CHAPTER 628:  FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
628.01   Definitions
   
628.02   Unlawful discriminatory practices
   
628.03   Objectives; specific action by city
   
628.04   Complaint procedure
   
628.05   Compliance with conciliation agreement required
Cross-reference:
   Ethnic intimidation, see § 636.22
   Fair Housing Board, see
Ch. 284
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
608.13
   Intimidation in connection with housing, see § 636.23
Statutory reference:
   Ohio Civil Rights Commission, see R.C. Ch. 4112
   Unlawful discriminatory practices, see R.C. §§ 4112.02, 4112.021, 4112.022
§ 628.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Discriminate." To treat an individual or group of individuals
differently, based on his, her or their race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, handicap or familial status.
   (b)   "Dwelling unit." A residential unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons occupying a single unit, including
permanent provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   (c)   "Familial status." Any individual who is under the age of 18 years and
living with a parent or another person having legal custody of the individual,
domiciled with the designee, by written permission, of the parent or other
person having custody, or who is pregnant or in the process of securing legal
custody of any person who is under the age of 18 years.
   (d)   "Handicapped person."  Any individual who has a physical or mental
disability which, for the individual, constitutes or results in a substantial
handicap; has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of the person's major life activities; or is regarded as having such an
impairment.
   (e)   "Housing accommodations."  Any building or structure or portion
thereof which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied, as the home residence or sleeping place of one or more
individuals, groups or families, whether or not living independently of each
other, and any vacant land offered for sale or lease.
   (f)   "Neighborhood."  Any area or community within the city which has been
recognized as such through custom or usage, and which may be delineated by
recognized boundaries, such as major highways, railroads or rivers and other
natural barriers.
   (g)   "Occupancy."  The purpose for which a building, or a part thereof, is
used or intended to be used.
   (h)   "Owner."  A person having a legal or equitable interest in property.
   (i)   "Person."  One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and other organized groups of persons.  It also includes
but is not limited to any owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager, broker,
salesperson, agent, employee, lending institution, the city, all other units of
local government and any departments, agencies, officers or employees thereof.
   (j)   "Restrictive covenant."  Any specification limiting the transfer,
rental, lease or other use of any housing because of race, color, religion,
sex, national origin, handicap or familial status, or any limitation based upon
affiliation with or approval by any person, directly or indirectly, employing
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status as a
condition of affiliation or approval.
(Ord. 29-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 628.02  UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
   (a)   No person shall commit an unlawful discriminatory practice in the
city. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to:
      (1)   Fail or refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease or
finance housing accommodations, or otherwise deny or withhold housing
accommodations from any person, because of the race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, handicap or familial status of a prospective owner, occupant
or user of the housing;
      (2)   Represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, handicap or familial status, or any prospective owner,
occupant or user of the housing, that the housing is not available for
inspection, sale, transfer, assignment, rental, lease or sublease, when in fact
it is so available;
      (3)   Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by a mortgage or
otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of housing, or otherwise withhold financing of housing from any
person, or discriminate against any person in fixing the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of a loan or other financial assistance,
because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or
familial status of any present or prospective owner, occupant or user of the
housing, provided that the person, whether an individual, corporation or
association of any type, lends money as one of the principal aspects of or
incident to his or her principal business and not as part of the purchase price
of an owner-occupied residence he or she is selling not merely casually or
occasionally to a relative or friend;
      (4)   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of
selling, transferring, assigning, renting, leasing or subleasing of any
housing, or in furnishing facilities, services or privileges in connection with
the ownership, occupancy or use of any housing, because of the race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status of any present or
prospective owner, occupant or user of the housing;
      (5)   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any
loan of money, whether or not secured by a mortgage or otherwise, for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing,
because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or
familial status of any present or prospective owner, occupant or user of the
housing;
      (6)   Print, circulate, advertise or publish any statement or
advertisement relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental, lease,
sublease or acquisition of any housing, or the loan of money, whether or not
secured by a mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing, which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status;
      (7)   Make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep any record
or use any form of application containing questions or entries concerning race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status, in
connection with the sale or lease of any housing or the loan of any money,
whether or not secured by a mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing;
      (8)   Include in any transfer, repair or lease of housing any restrictive
covenant, or honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any
restrictive covenant, provided that the prior inclusion of a restrictive
covenant in the chain of title shall not be deemed a violation of this
provision, unless the restrictive covenant is in violation of this chapter;
      (9)   Induce or solicit, or attempt to induce or solicit, a housing
listing, sale or transaction, or discourage or attempt to discourage the same,
by representing, directly or indirectly, that a change has occurred or may
occur with respect to the racial, religious, sexual or ethnic composition of
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located, or induce or
solicit, or attempt to induce or solicit, the sale or listing by representing
that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, handicap or familial status in the area will or
may have results such as the following:
         A.   The lowering of property values;
         B.   A change in the racial, religious, sexual or ethnic composition
of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located; or
         C.   An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area;
      (10)   Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing
accommodations, or discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions
or such access, membership or participation, on the basis of that person's
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status;
      (11)   Coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person having exercised or
enjoyed, or having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, any right granted or protected;
      (12)   Whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force, willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with any person because of
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status, and
because that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing,
occupying contracting or negotiating for any dwelling, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting housing accommodations.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of division (a) hereof is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to the penalty
provided in §
698.02. 
(Ord. 29-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 628.03  OBJECTIVES; SPECIFIC ACTION BY CITY.
   The city, in promoting equal housing opportunities for all its citizens, and
having agreed to take affirmative action toward this end, has set forth
objectives and specific action steps as follows:
   (a)   It shall increase public awareness of fair housing laws and assure
equal access to housing.
      (1)   It shall submit articles to local and surrounding newspapers about
fair housing laws, complaint procedures and the benefits of promoting fair
housing and the like. Not less than two articles shall be submitted each
program year.
      (2)   It shall produce and distribute brochures about fair housing laws
and the like.
      (3)   It shall produce posters on equal rights in housing and post them
in public places.
      (4)   It shall provide a public service announcement explaining that the
city is promoting fair housing.
   (b)   It shall provide service and information to victims of discrimination
and assist them in asserting their housing rights.
      (1)   It shall designate a person to be a fair housing officer in charge
of receiving complaints.
      (2)   It shall inform the public of telephone numbers to call for
complaints via brochures, posters and newspaper articles.
      (3)   It shall provide training for fair housing officers to familiarize
the officers with fair housing laws, how to receive complaints, how to refer
complaints, realistic conciliation/investigation efforts, keeping records and
the like.
      (4)   Once training is completed, the fair housing officer will be
responsible for:
         A.   Receiving fair housing complaints;
         B.   Providing a complainant with an opinion as to whether he or she
is a victim of discrimination;
         C.   Informing the complainant as to filing a discrimination
complaint;
         D.   Assisting the complainant in filing a discrimination complaint;
         E.   Attempting reconciliation, if possible, and if desired by the
complainant; and
         F.   Keeping records of all complaints received.
(Ord. 29-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 628.04  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Whenever it is charged in writing and under oath by a person (referred
to as the "complainant") that any person (referred to as the "respondent") has
engaged or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice(s), or upon his
or her own initiative in matters relating to such unlawful discriminatory
practice(s), the fair housing officer shall initiate a preliminary
investigation. Such preliminary investigation shall be an attempt to determine
whether or not there is any merit to the charge. If it is determined after such
preliminary investigation that it is not probable that any unlawful
discriminatory practice has occurred, the fair housing officer shall notify the
complainant and the respondent of his or her determination and no further
action will be pursued. No such complaint shall be made later than 120 days
after the date of occurrence of the act or practice complained of.
   (b)   If it is determined that it is probable that any unlawful
discriminatory practice has occurred, the fair housing officer shall endeavor
to eliminate such practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion, which proceedings may include or involve the execution by the
parties of a written conciliation agreement setting forth the manner, terms and
conditions of the resolution of such dispute, and requiring compliance with any
such terms and conditions. If, after the investigation and conference, the fair
housing officer is satisfied that any unlawful discriminatory practice of the
respondent will be eliminated, he or she may treat the complaint as
conciliated.
(Ord. 29-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 628.05  COMPLIANCE WITH CONCILIATION AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of any
conciliation agreement entered into by such person or any order issued by the
fair housing officer.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 29-96, passed 8-19-1996)
CHAPTER 630:  GAMBLING
Section
   
630.01   Definitions
   
630.02   Gambling in general
   
630.03   Operating a gambling house
   
630.04   Public gaming
   
630.05   Cheating
   
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game
   
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations
   
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator
   
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement
   
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
630.11   Raffle drawings
   
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
Cross-reference
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
608.16
Statutory reference:
   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.081
   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.082
   Power to destroy devices, see R.C. § 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling, see R.C. § 715.49
§ 630.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Amateur athletic organization." Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are training for amateur
athletic competition that is sanctioned by a national governing body as defined
in the "Amateur Sports Act" of 1978, 90 Stat. 3045, 36 U.S.C. § 373.
   (b)   "Bet." The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   (c)   "Bingo." Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles.
   (d)   "Bingo game operator." Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling and serving food or beverages.
   (e)   "Bingo session." A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in this section,
instant bingo and seal cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in division (1) of this definition.
   (f)   "Bingo supplies." Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or
cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
"bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes of
this chapter, "bingo supplies" are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.
   (g)   "Bookmaking." The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (h)   "Chamber of commerce." Any organization of individuals, professionals
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   (i)   "Charitable bingo game." Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition of "bingo" in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08
and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (j)   "Charitable instant bingo organization." An organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC §
501(c)(3) and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A
"charitable instant bingo organization" does not include a charitable
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran's organization, a
fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo
conducted or assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization or
a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (k)   "Charitable organization." Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, any tax exempt religious, educational, veteran's, fraternal, sporting,
service, nonprofit medical, volunteer rescue service, volunteer firefighter's,
senior citizen's, historic railroad educational, youth athletic, amateur
athletic or youth athletic park organization. An organization is tax exempt if
the organization is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19), or if the organization is a
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and is described in IRC § 501(c)(7). To qualify as a charitable
organization, an organization, except a volunteer rescue service or volunteer
firefighter's organization, shall have been in continuous existence as such in
this state for a period of two years immediately preceding either the making of
an application for a bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of
any game of chance as provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. A charitable organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization or a
sporting organization does not have to have been in continuous existence as
such in this state for a period of two years immediately preceding either the
making of an application for a bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the
conducting of any game of chance as provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (l)   "Charitable purpose." The net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo, is used by, or is given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any of the
following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or those individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of the post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for that use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of "volunteer firefighter's
organization" in this section.
   (m)   "Community action agency." Has the same  meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   (n)   "Conduct." To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance.
   (o)   "Deal of instant bingo tickets." A single game of instant bingo
tickets all with the same serial number.
   (p)   "Distributor." Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (q)   "Educational organization." Any organization within this state that is
not organized for profit, the primary purpose of which is to educate and
develop the capabilities of individuals through instruction by means of
operating or contributing to the support of a school, academy, college or
university.
   (r)   "Electronic bingo aid."
      (1)   "Electronic bingo aid" means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   "Electronic bingo aid" does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (s)   "Expenses." The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended
for all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization's
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(B)(1).
   (t)   “Fraternal organization.” Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   (u)   "Gambling device." Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (v)   "Gambling offense." Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2915.02, § 2915.03, § 2915.04, § 2915.05, §
2915.06, § 2915.07, § 2915.08, § 2915.081, § 2915.082, § 2915.09, § 2915.091, §
2915.092, § 2915.10 or § 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition or a violation of R.C. §
2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (w)   "Game flare." The board or placard that accompanies each deal of
instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (x)   "Game of chance." Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a
player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (y)   "Game of chance conducted for profit." Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but
does not include bingo.
   (z)   "Gross annual revenues." The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described
in division (2) of the definition of "bingo" in this section.
   (aa)   "Gross profit." Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   (bb)   "Gross receipts." All money or assets, including admission fees, that
a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes
paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo.  "Gross receipts" does not
include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (cc)   "Historic railroad." All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way
of a railroad that was owned and operated by a for-profit common carrier in
this state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (dd)   "Historic railroad educational organization." An organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC §
501(c)(3), that owns in fee simple the tracks and the right-of-way of a
historic railroad that the organization restores or maintains and on which the
organization provides excursions as part of a program to promote tourism and
educate visitors regarding the role of railroad transportation in Ohio history,
and that received as donations from a charitable organization that holds a
license to conduct bingo under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 an amount
equal to at least 50% of that licensed charitable organization's net proceeds
from the conduct of bingo during each of the five years preceding June 30,
2003.
   (ee)   "Instant bingo." A form of bingo that uses folded or banded tickets
or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners. "Instant bingo" includes seal cards. "Instant bingo" does not
include any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency,
token or an equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video
display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
   (ff)   "Instant bingo ticket dispenser." A mechanical device that dispenses
an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that
has the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (gg)   "IRC" or "Internal Revenue Code." The Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (hh)   "Manufacturer." Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies
from raw materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to
or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   (ii)   "Merchandise prize." Any item of value, but shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (jj)   "Net profit." Gross profit minus expenses.
   (kk)   "Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo." Gross
profit minus the ordinary, necessary and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies.
   (ll)   "Nonprofit medical organization." Either of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that has been incorporated as a nonprofit
corporation for at least five years and that has continuously operated and will
be operated exclusively to provide, or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to provide
hospital, medical, research or therapeutic services for the public;
      (2)   Any organization that is described and qualified under IRC § 501(c)
(3), that has been incorporated as a nonprofit corporation for at least five
years, and that has continuously operated and will be operated primarily to
provide, or to contribute to the support of organizations or institutions
organized or operated primarily to provide hospital, medical, research or
therapeutic services for the public.
   (mm)   "Participant." Any person who plays bingo.
   (nn)   "Person." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any
firm or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (oo)   "Pool not conducted for profit." A scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount
of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (pp)   "Punch board." A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered
slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or receptacle when
used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw the numbered
slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established
for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the
"punch board" includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   (qq)   “Raffle.” A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by
one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the
drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to
attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (rr)   "Redeemable voucher." Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other
noncash representation of value.
   (ss)   "Religious organization." Any church, body of communicants, or group
that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (tt)   "Revoke." To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder
of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, § 2915.081 or § 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (uu)   "Scheme of chance." A slot machine, lottery, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-
based amusement machine or a pool not conducted for profit.
   (vv)   "Seal card." A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets
in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that,
when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or
symbols.
   (ww)   "Security personnel." Any person who either is a Sheriff, Deputy
Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer's training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to 109.79 and who is
hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   (xx)   "Senior citizen's organization." Any private organization, not
organized for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide
recreational or social services for persons who are 55 years of age or older
and that is described and qualified under IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (yy)   "Service organization." Either of the following:
      (1)   Any organization, not organized for profit, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to provide
medical and therapeutic services for persons who are disabled, born with birth
defects, or have any other mental or physical disabilities or those organized
and operated exclusively to protect or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to protect
animals from inhumane treatment or to provide immediate shelter to victims of
domestic violence;
      (2)   Any organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is an
organization, not organized for profit, that is organized and operated
primarily to provide, or to contribute to the support of organizations or
institutions organized and operated primarily to provide, medical and
therapeutic services for persons who are disabled, born with birth defects, or
have any other mental or physical disability.
   (zz)   “Skill-based amusement machine.”
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards
the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this section, "game" and "play" mean one event from
the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are determined
without payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine
that involves a single game, play, contest, competition or tournament may be
awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (aaa)   "Slot machine."
      (1)   Either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill-based amusement machine or
an instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   (bbb)   "Sporting organization." A hunting, fishing or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that
is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to the Ohio League of
Sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period
of three years.
   (ccc)   "Suspend." To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, § 2915.081 or § 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (ddd)   “Veteran’s organization.” Any individual post or state headquarters
of a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post
of a national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters or
auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has
received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s
association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from
the national veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in
good standing with the national veteran’s association.  As used in this
division, “national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s association that
has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years
and either is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a
national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (eee)   "Volunteer firefighter's organization." Any organization of
volunteer firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire
department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a
county, municipal corporation or township.
   (fff)   "Volunteer rescue service organization." Any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (ggg)   "Youth athletic organization." Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the
support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
   (hhh)   "Youth athletic park organization." Any organization, not organized
for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for
athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to
the support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 630.02  GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4)
of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking.  For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted either for a period of four consecutive days or
less and not more than twice a year, or for a period of five consecutive days
not more than once a year, and are conducted on premises owned by the
charitable organization for a period of no less than one year immediately
preceding the conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a
governmental unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance. A charitable organization shall not lease
premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to conduct a festival
described in this division, if the veteran’s or fraternal organization already
has leased the premises 12 times during the preceding year to charitable
organizations for that purpose.  If a charitable organization leases premises
from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in
this division, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the
premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session
that a charitable organization may pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it leases premises from
another charitable organization to conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2915.02)
§ 630.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 630.04  PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor.  If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 630.05  CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports.  Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 630.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for "expenses" in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in the definition for "charitable
purpose" in R.C. § 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit from the
proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and
in accordance with R.C. § 2915.101.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session.  If the charitable organization leases from a
person other than a charitable organization the premises on which it conducts
bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall provide only the premises to
the organization and shall not provide the organization with bingo game
operators, security personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo
supplies or any other type of service. A charitable organization shall not
lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to more than one other
charitable organization per calendar week for the purpose of conducting bingo
sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall
not lease premises that it owns, leases or otherwise is empowered to lease to
more than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo
sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be
conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization.  “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the ten-hour period
between 12:00 a.m. midnight and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten
hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not
specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period
not specified on its license.  This division does not prohibit the sale of
instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at
10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization
to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the
time specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct
bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time
specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to
the Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(F).  A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo  supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization's members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address and Social Security number of all
persons who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(Z), § 2915.02(D) or § 2915.101, a list of
each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from "gross receipts" under R.C. § 2915.01(X);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. 
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks drawn on the bingo session or game
account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member or employee of the organization;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member or
employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper
court to enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law
enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing an action as described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede or interfere with any inspection, audit or
observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game of
chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of
this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08  QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 630.09  EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only.  A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.00.
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in division (2)
of its definition in R.C. § 2915.01.
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.00.
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.00.
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
division (2) of its definition in R.C. § 2915.01.
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section.  A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing
the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 630.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran's
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game;
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   (1)   A charitable organization may conduct instant bingo other than
at a bingo session at not more than five separate locations. A charitable
organization that is exempt from federal taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization or
a fraternal organization is not limited in the number of separate locations the
charitable organization may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
      (2)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 630.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a charitable
organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community
school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
is described in IRC § 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) may
conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school and does not
need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is
not for profit.
      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in division (a)(1)
of this section, but that is not also described in IRC § 501(c)(3), conducts a
raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least 50% of the net
profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C. § 2915.01(Z)
or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state or any
political subdivision.
   (b)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per year to
raise money for the chamber of commerce.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (a) or (b) of this section, no person
shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is
not for profit.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 630.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "retail income from all commercial activity"
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   A charitable instant bingo organization may conduct instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at not more than five separate locations.
   (c)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization
shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at
which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in
the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each
location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being
conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract
with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted, provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of
the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct
of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more
than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (d)   Except as provided in division (g) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract pursuant
to division (c) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, "full gross
profit" means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
   (f)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (c) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (c) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (g)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (h)   (1)   A veteran's organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting
organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to R.C. Chapter
2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if all of the
following apply:
         A.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day,
provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not
later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its
own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (h)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division (h)(1) of
this section is raising money for another organization that is described in IRC
§ 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state, the veteran's
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a
written contract with the organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1),
(a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that
maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and
that is in good standing in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That
contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that
the veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to the
charitable organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3)
and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good
standing in this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division
(h)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under R.C. Chapter 4303,
that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation or cancellation if the
veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization
violates a provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (h)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's organization,
fraternal organization or sporting organization has entered into a written
contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (h) of this section,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093(C), with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or
lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 630.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ii)(1), (ii)(2), (ii)(3) or (ii)(4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for
playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-
price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
CHAPTER 636:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
   
636.00   Definitions
   
636.01   Negligent homicide
   
636.02   Assault
   
636.03   Negligent assault
   
636.04   Aggravated menacing
   
636.05   Menacing by stalking
   
636.06   Reserved
   
636.07   Menacing
   
636.08   Unlawful restraint
   
636.09   Criminal child enticement
   
636.10   Coercion
   
636.11   Nonsupport of dependents
   
636.12   Endangering children
   
636.13   Interference with custody
   
636.14   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
636.15   Reserved
   
636.16   Threatening or harassing telecommunications
   
636.17   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection
   
636.18   Domestic violence
   
636.19   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
636.20   Hazing
   
636.21   Illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products;
transaction scans
   
636.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
636.23   Intimidation in connection with housing
   
636.24   Failing to provide for a functionally impaired person
   
636.25   Failure to perform viability testing
   
636.26   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Drugs, see
Ch. 624
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see §
608.02
   Harassment by laser beams, see §
648.17
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, see §
678.08
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   Physical harm to persons defined, see §
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations,
see §
612.02
   Serious physical harm to persons defined, see §
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see
Ch. 666
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see §
434.10
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see R.C. §§ 3113.33 et seq.
§ 636.00  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter and any other provision of these
Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Another's unborn" or "other person's unborn."  A member of the
species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a
period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live
birth occurs.
      (2)   "Unlawful termination of another's pregnancy."  Causing the death
of an unborn member of the species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the
womb of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms "another's unborn," "other person's unborn" and
"unlawful termination of another's pregnancy" that are set forth in division
(a) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman.  An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, § 2903.02, § 2903.03, § 2903.04, §
2903.05, § 2903.06, § 2903.08, § 2903.11, § 2903.12, § 2903.13, § 2903.14, §
2903.21 or § 2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as
applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the
second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, §
2919.13(B), § 2919.151, § 2919.17 or § 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of the section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 636.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 636.02  ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another's unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault.  Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(G).
(R.C. § 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation,
firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or employee
of a public children services agency or private child placing agency; assault
at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus
drivers, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 636.03  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another's unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
§ 636.04  AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
the other person's unborn, or a member of that other person's immediate family.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
§ 636.05  MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or cause mental distress to the other person.
         B.   No person, through the use of any electronic method of remotely
transferring information, including but not limited to any computer, computer
network, computer program or computer system, shall post a message with purpose
to urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)(1)A. of this
section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender's
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or § 2903.214,
regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the order is the
victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   "Computer," "computer network," "computer program," "computer
system," and "telecommunications device." Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2913.01.
         B.   "Emergency facility person." The singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         C.   "Emergency medical services person."  The singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         D.   "Mental distress."  Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         E.   "Pattern of conduct."  Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct or
delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency
medical services person or emergency facility person of any authorized act
within the public official's, firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical
services person's or emergency facility person's official capacity, or the
posting of messages or receipt of information or data through the use of an
electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but not
limited to a computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or
telecommunications device, may constitute a "pattern of conduct".
         F.   "Post a message." Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one's own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         G.   "Public official."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         H.   "Sexual motivation."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         I.   "Third person."  In relation to conduct as described in division
(a)(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)D.2. of this  section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order.  Consult R.C. § 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or § 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty
to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for a protection order issued
pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214, two or more violations of
R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22 or 2911.211, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement, or one or more violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount
allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2903.214, the court shall order that the offender pay the costs of the
installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the
electronic monitoring device. If the court determines that the offender is
indigent, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and
the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of
funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to R.C. § 2743.191. The total
amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to R.C. § 2743.191 for
electronic monitoring under R.C. §§ 2151.34, 2903.214 and 2919.27 shall not
exceed $300,000 per year.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   As used in this section, "protection order issued by a court of
another state" means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection.  The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 636.06  MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person's unborn  or a member of the other person's immediate family.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (b), menacing is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor
of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was
an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person's liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, "sexual motivation" has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 636.08  RESERVED.
§ 636.09  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
   (a)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or onto
any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity.
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of, any board of
education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the
actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.
   (b)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a) of
this section.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a) of this
section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety or welfare of the
child.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child enticement,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section, a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, R.C. § 2907.02 or § 2907.03 or former R.C. § 2907.12,
or R.C. § 2905.01 or § 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under
17 years of age at the time of the offense, criminal child enticement is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Sexual motivation.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
      (2)   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   “Vessel.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1547.01.
(R.C. § 2905.05)
§ 636.10  COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, “threat” includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 636.11  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age 18, or
mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;
      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack
of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her own
support.
   (b)   No person shall abandon or fail to provide support as established by
court order to another person whom, by court order or decree, the person is
legally obligated to support.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was mentally or
physically disabled and under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or
(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, §
2151.231, § 2151.232, § 2151.33, § 3105.21, § 3109.05, § 3111.13, § 3113.04, §
3113.31 or § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 636.12  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age, shall create
a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a duty of
care, protection or support.  It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection or support under this division when the parent, guardian, custodian
or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical or mental
illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer alone, in
accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that this conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or § 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or § 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation
of this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division.  For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (c)(1) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Controlled substance.”  Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.
         B.   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division and division (b)(5) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Material,” “performance,” “obscene,” and “sexual activity.” Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         B.   “Nudity-oriented matter.” Any material or performance that shows
a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   “Sexually oriented matter.” Any material or performance that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., (e)(1)C. or
(e)(1)D., a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or (e)(1)D. of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5) or
(b)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C., endangering children
in violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, § 2903.08, § 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under
R.C. Chapter 4506, Chapter 4509, Chapter 4510 or Chapter 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
(e)(3)B., (e)(3)C. or (e)(3)D. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (c) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A)-(E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 636.13  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section from the
parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically disabled
child under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or
mentally disabled.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.  It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the state or
if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
§ 636.14  CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child, as defined in R.C. §
2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in R.C. § 2152.02;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.022, or a delinquent
child, as defined in R.C. § 2152.02;
      (3)   If the person is the parent, guardian or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and  periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each
day of a violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
§ 636.15  RESERVED.
§ 636.16  THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Fails to identify the caller to the recipient of the
telecommunication and makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient.
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made.
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged.
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecom- munication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises.
   (b)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or permit
a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the
person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty
of telecommunications harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(5) or (b) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a
felony on each subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be assessed in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service or information service, or
against any officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service or
information service, for any injury, death or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s
provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms
of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution
of an alleged violation of this section.  A provider of a telecommunications
service or information service, or an officer, employee or agent of a
telecommunications service or information service, is immune from any civil or
criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s
provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the
terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or
prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Caller.” The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (2)   “Economic harm.” All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (3)   “Sexual activity.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (4)   “Telecommunication” and “telecom- munications device.” Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (f)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 636.17  PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
§ 636.18  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. 
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former  municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, § 2909.06, §
2909.07, § 2911.12, § 2911.211 or § 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was
a family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense,  a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Family or household member.”  Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   “Person living as a spouse.”  A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order.  Consult R.C. § 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See § 636.05(c)
of this code.
(1996 Code, § 636.18) 
§ 636.19  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Concert.”  A musical performance of which the primary component is
a presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
“concert” does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   “Facility.”  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      (3)   “Live entertainment performance.” Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A “live
entertainment performance” does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   “Person.”  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity
specified in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   “Restricted entertainment area.”  Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment per- formance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only”.
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (b) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if the officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division.  In determining whether to grant
an exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
               b.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected
to attend the concert;
               c.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the
expected crowd.
            2.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a
form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants
or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances.  The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 636.20  HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section, “hazing” means doing any act or coercing
another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or
other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental
or physical harm to any person.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee or faculty member of any primary,
secondary or post-
secondary school or of any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 636.21  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS;
TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
         B.   “Cigarette.” Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.
         C.   “Distribute.” To furnish, give or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of
the cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         D.   “Proof of age.” A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         E.   “Vending machine.” Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or any papers used to roll cigarettes, no
agent, employee or representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor,
wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to
roll cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products or papers used to roll cigarettes to any child;
         B.   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products
or papers used to roll cigarettes in any place that does not have posted in a
conspicuous place a sign stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing
cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes to a
person under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age
or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other
tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes for that child;
         D.   Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than 0.6 of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes in a smaller quantity than that placed in the
pack or other container by the manufacturer.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes or other tobacco
products by or from a vending machine except in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which children are not generally permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes and other tobacco product
purchases from the vending machine will be readily observed by the person who
owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person.  For the purpose of
this section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an
unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway or outer waiting area shall not be
considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain view and control of the
person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is 18 years of
age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
         B.   The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes to a child under division
(a)(2)A. of this section is a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older,
or legal guardian of the child.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes,
other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes while the child is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
         A.   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has
consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol.
         B.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved of the research protocol.
         C.   The child is participating in the research protocol at the
facility or location specified in the research protocol.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D. or (a)
(2)E.  or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of
cigarettes or other tobacco products, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (a)(2)A.,
(a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E. or (a)(3) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal distribution of cigarettes
or other tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting children to use cigarettes or other tobacco products, a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of division (a)(2)C. or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting children to use cigarettes or other tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll
cigarettes that are given, sold or otherwise distributed to a child in
violation of this division (a) and that are used, possessed, purchased or
received by a child in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and
forfeiture as contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Tobacco product transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (c) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Card holder.” Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes or other tobacco products from a
seller, agent or employee.
         B.   “Identification card.” An identification card issued under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   “Seller.” A seller of cigarettes or other tobacco products and
includes any person whose gift of or other distribution of cigarettes or other
tobacco products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this
section.
         D.   “Transaction scan.” The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes or
other tobacco products.
         E.   “Transaction scan device.” Any commercial device or combination
of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes or other tobacco products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes or
other tobacco products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes or other tobacco products to the person
presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes or other
tobacco products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product transaction scan, and the
court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each
violation.  The Clerk of the Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to
the County Treasurer for deposit into the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes or other tobacco products
is an element of the alleged violation, if the seller, agent or employee raises
and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes or
other tobacco products presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes or other tobacco products were sold, given away or
otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the
identification  presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section.  For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a 
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes or other tobacco
products is 18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d), “authorized recipient of tobacco
products” means a person who is:
         A.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. § 5743.15;
         B.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
         C.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in IRC § 5702;
         D.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. § 1311
or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
         E.   An officer, employee or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
         F.   A department, agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of
the federal government or of this state;
         G.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the Tax
Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
      (2)   The purpose of this division (d) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         B.   No common carrier, contract carrier or other person shall
knowingly transport cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the
carrier or other person reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of
tobacco products. If cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it
shall be presumed that the common carrier, contract carrier or other person
knew that the person to whom the cigarettes were delivered was not an
authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes”.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
§ 636.22  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, § 2903.22, § 2909.06 or §
2909.07, or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race,
color, religion or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. 
Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense
the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation.  In the
case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic
intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 636.23  INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 636.24  FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods or service that is
necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired person
when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to the
functionally impaired person.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods or service that is
necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired person
when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally impaired
person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Caretaker.” A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
“Caretaker” does not include a person who owns, operates or administers, or who
is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   “Functionally impaired person.”  Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for his or her own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 636.25  FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (a)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion or the
attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the
physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable,
and the physician makes that determination after performing a medical
examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or causing to be
performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity, or
other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical
judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child is
viable.
   (b)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation without first entering the determination made in division (a) of this
section and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests in the
medical record of the pregnant woman.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(R.C. § 2919.18)
§ 636.26  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
R.C. § 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
642.01   Definitions
   
642.02   Possession of municipal property
   
642.03   Unauthorized use of property
   
642.04   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
   
642.05   Desecration
   
642.06   Arson
   
642.07   Determining property value in arson
   
642.08   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
642.09   Criminal mischief
   
642.10   Criminal trespass
   
642.11   Aggravated trespass
   
642.12   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
642.13   Injuring or destroying fire apparatus
   
642.14   Tampering with fire hydrants and reservoirs
   
642.15   Placing signs
Cross-reference:
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices, see §
414.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
608.17
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
608.16
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations, see §
678.11
   Physical harm to property defined, see §
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.12
   Property defined, see §
606.01
   Serious physical harm to property defined, see §
606.01
   Theft and fraud, see
Ch. 672
Statutory reference:
   E-mail advertisement, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see R.C. § 1.07
§ 642.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and
Chapter 672, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Anhydrous ammonia." A compound formed by the combination of two
gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below.
"Anhydrous ammonia" is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3).
"Anhydrous ammonia" by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen,
which is approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   (b)   "Assistance dog." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   (c)   "Cable television service."  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (d)   "Coin machine."  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do
both of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   (e)   "Computer."  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic
and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
"Computer" includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   (f)   "Computer contaminant."  A computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized
access to, functionally impair, record or transmit information within a
computer, computer system, or computer network without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of
a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of
a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4)
of this definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "viruses" and
"worms" that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "Trojans" or "Trojan
horses" that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "zombies" that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer's or network's performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as "denial of service" or "distributed denial of service" attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "trap doors", "back
doors", or "root kits" that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (g)   "Computer hacking."
      (1)   "Computer hacking" means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services, including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers and web
servers, by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, "misuse of computer and network services"
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as "port scanners" or "probes" to
intentionally access any computer, computer system or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network's facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management and test of a computer, computer
system or computer network, including but not limited to domain name services,
mail transfer services and other operating system services, computer programs
commonly called "ping", "tcpdump", and "traceroute" and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as "nslookup" and "whois" and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system or computer network or other person authorized
to give consent.
      (2)   "Computer hacking" does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program or computer network.
   (h)   "Computer network."  A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (i)   "Computer program."  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (j)   "Computer services."  Includes but is not limited to the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (k)   "Computer software."  Computer programs, procedures and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (l)   "Computer system."  A computer and related devices, whether connected
or unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (m)   "Counterfeit telecommunications device."  A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service.  The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone or tumbler
microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting,
receiving or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or
information service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment,
hardware or software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the
electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (n)   "Create a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any person." 
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (o)   "Credit card."  Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device or
other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under R.C. § 301.29.
   (p)   "Dangerous drug." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (q)   "Data."  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network.
   (r)   "Deception."  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act
or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (s)   "Defraud."  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for
oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to
another.
   (t)   "Deprive."  To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (u)   "Disabled adult."  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has
some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (v)   "Drug abuse offense."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (w)   "Elderly person."  A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (x)   "Electronic fund transfer."  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   (y)   "Emergency personnel."  Any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)   A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   (z)   "Federally-licensed firearms dealer." Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5502.63.
   (aa)   "Firearm" and "dangerous ordnance."  Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
   (bb)   "Forge."  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any
means, any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   (cc)   "Gain access."  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data
in, retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   (dd)   "Information service."
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   "Information service" does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (ee)   "Internet."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   (ff)   "Motor vehicle."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (gg)   "Occupied structure."  Any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (hh)   "Owner."  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any
person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or
control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even
though the ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   (ii)   "Police dog or horse." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   (jj)   "Political subdivision."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (kk)   "Rented property."  Personal property in which the right of
possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate
term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (ll)   "Services."  Includes labor, personal services, professional
services, rental services, public utility services including wireless service
as defined in R.C. § 4931.40(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services and, for purposes
of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes
cable services as defined in that section.
   (mm)   "Slug."  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose.
   (nn)   "State."  Has the same meaning  as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (oo)   "Telecommunication."  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission or reception of data, images, signals, sounds or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (pp)   "Telecommunications device."  Any instrument, equipment, machine or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (qq)   "Telecommunications service."  The providing, allowing, facilitating
or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (rr)   "Theft offense."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, § 2911.02, § 2911.11, § 2911.12, §
2911.13, § 2911.31, § 2911.32, § 2913.02, § 2913.03, § 2913.04, § 2913.041, §
2913.11, § 2913.21, § 2913.31, § 2913.32, § 2913.33, § 2913.34, § 2913.40, §
2913.42, § 2913.43, § 2913.44, § 2913.45, § 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. §
2913.47 or § 2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51, § 2915.05 or § 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, § 2913.81 or § 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (ss)   "Utter."  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver or display.
   (tt)   "Writing."  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum,
note, paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02  POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 642.03  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the law enforcement automated database system created pursuant to R.C. §
5503.10 without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of, the chair of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System Steering
Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Cable operator." Any person or group of persons that does either
of the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   "Cable service." Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   "Cable system." Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. 
"Cable system" does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term "cable system" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.04  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 642.05  DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   As used in this section, "cemetery" means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
§ 642.06  ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly cause or
create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without
the other person's consent.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.  Except as otherwise
provided in this division, violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, then the violation is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson, felony provisions generally, see R.C. § 2909.03
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.07  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06:
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, "fair market value" has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. §
2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B)-(D))
§ 642.08  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person's consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   "Alley," "street," and "vehicle." Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
         B.   "Highway." Any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         C.   "Vessel" and "waters in this state." Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1547.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism.  Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.09  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with the property of another;
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another,
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
   (b)   As used in this section, "safety device" means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of
danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or
any other device, apparatus or equipment intended for protecting or preserving
the safety of persons or property.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and
shall be punished as provided in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.10  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or  all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "All-purpose vehicle", "off-highway motorcycle" and "snowmobile"
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   "Land" or "premises" includes any land, building, structure or
place belonging to, controlled by or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), "place of public amusement" means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond
reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent
of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.11  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him or
her.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.12  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer's control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's duties
or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or
attempted.
      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an
assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is
being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the
following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person's control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the Police Department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation
of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or
served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the police dog or horse
or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in
serious physical harm to that dog or horse to the extent that the dog or horse
needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of
replacing that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or
horse or a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind,
deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Assistance dog," "blind" and "mobility impaired person." Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (2)   "Physical harm." Any injury, illness or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (3)   "Police dog or horse." A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (4)   "Serious physical harm." Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 642.13  INJURING OR DESTROYING FIRE APPARATUS.
   (a)   No person shall cut the hose of the Fire Department or otherwise
injure, destroy or render the same unfit for use during any fire.  No person
shall break, deface, destroy, injure or render useless any engine, hose cart or
other property of the Fire Department during a fire.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1986 Code, § 541.10)
§ 642.14  TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS AND RESERVOIRS.
   (a)   No person shall injure, destroy or deface any property belonging to
the Fire Department, or take any water from any public reservoir, except in
case of fire, or unlock, uncover or in any way damage any public reservoir, or
open any fire hydrant, without the permission of the Fire Chief or his or her
designee, or in any way tamper with or injure any of the gates, hydrants or
reservoirs connected with the fire service or the waterworks.
(1923 Code, § 49)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(1986 Code, § 541.09(b))
§ 642.15  PLACING SIGNS.
   (a)   No person shall place a sign or other material upon a city-owned pole,
fixture or apparatus, or upon any tree located within a city right-of-way along
a public thoroughfare.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 12-94, passed 6-6-1994)
CHAPTER 648:  PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
   
648.01   Riot
   
648.02   Failure to disperse
   
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
648.04   Disorderly conduct
   
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
648.07   Inducing panic
   
648.08   Making false alarms
   
648.09   Inciting to violence
   
648.10   Loitering
   
648.11   Curfew
   
648.12   Loud and unnecessary noises
   
648.13   Operation of sound trucks
   
648.14   Zones of quiet
   
648.15   Motor vehicle noise
   
648.16   Reserved
   
648.17   Harassment by laser beams
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Assault, see §§
636.02,
636.03
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   Deadly force defined, see §
606.01
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Desecration, see §
642.05
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
608.17
   Fireworks, see §
678.10
   Force defined, see §
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
608.13
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see §
612.03
   Menacing, see §§
636.04 et seq.
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.21
   "Peeling"; cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.37
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons, see §
678.09
   Resisting arrest, see §
608.08
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles, see §
438.20
   Trespass, see §§
642.10,
642.11
Statutory reference:
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
R.C. § 3761.16
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see R.C. § 715.49
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see R.C. §
5503.02
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
§ 648.01  RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 648.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse.  No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 648.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe the force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe the force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 648.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have that effect on others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(2) of this section,
disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person or other authorized person who is engaged in the person's duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Committed in the vicinity of a school." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   "Emergency facility." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   "Emergency facility person." The singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (4)   "Emergency medical services person." The singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 648.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative's duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Emergency facility."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (2)   "Emergency facility person."  The singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   "Emergency medical services person."  The singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 648.07  INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or
more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
If the public place involved in a violation of division (a)(1) is a school or
an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Biological agent." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      (2)   "Economic harm." Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  "Economic harm" as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   "Emergency medical services personnel." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.
      (4)   "Institution of higher education." Any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1),
community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   "School." Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of
this section is committed.
      (6)   "Weapon of mass destruction." Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of "destructive
device" pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 648.08  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this section
pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section, "economic harm" and "weapon of mass
destruction" have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence.  If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 648.10  LOITERING.
   (a)   No person shall loiter or prowl in any public or private place at a
time, in a manner or under circumstances which warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or security or property in the surrounding area.
   (b)   Without limitation, the following circumstances may be considered in
determining whether the alarm is warranted:
      (1)   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (2)   Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a police
officer;
      (3)   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows or other
means of access to buildings, houses or vehicles.
   (c)   Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting  him or her to identify himself or
herself and explain his or her presence and conduct.  No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply
with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation
given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Loitering." Lingering, hanging around, delaying, sauntering and
moving slowly about, where that conduct is not due to physical defects or
conditions.
      (2)   "Private place." Means and includes places privately owned but open
to the public generally, such as shopping centers, retail stores,
transportation terminals, movie theaters, office buildings, restaurants and all
distinctly private places such as homes or private residences and apartment
houses.
      (3)   "Public place." Means and includes public streets and alleyways,
public restrooms, public sidewalks, public parks, public buildings and
municipal airports.
      (4)   "Surrounding area." The area easily and immediately accessible to
the person under observation.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(1986 Code, § 509.09)
§ 648.11  CURFEW.
   (a)   No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll
or play in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or
other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lot or unsupervised place, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied
by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
control of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and control of the minor, or to a minor while on a
direct route home from, and within 30 minutes of the closing of, a supervised
school, church, Y.M.C.A., scouting or other similarly supervised activity.
   (c)   No parent, guardian or person having legal custody and control of any
minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate any of the provisions of this
section.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.  Minors violating any of the provisions of this section shall be dealt
with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure.
(1986 Code, § 531.02)
§ 648.12  LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISES.
   (a)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Person." Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality
thereof.
      (2)   "Property line." The line which represents the legal boundary of
the property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased or otherwise occupied by a person. In cases involving sound from
an activity on a public street or other public right-of-way, the "property
line" shall be the nearest public right-of-way line.
      (3)   "Sound amplifying equipment."  Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. It shall not be
construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by
occupants of the vehicle in which they are installed or warning devices on
authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other
vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
      (4)   "Sound truck." Any vehicle having mounted thereon, or attached
thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment.
      (5)   "Stationary noise." Sound made by any machine or by any device for
the amplification of the human voice or music, or any other sound originating
from a fixed location.
   (b)   Unnecessary noise prohibited.  No person shall make or continue, or
cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any
noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of persons of ordinary sensibilities.
   (c)   Examples of unnecessary noises.  The following acts, which constitute
a nonexclusive list, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises
in violation of this section:
      (1)   Horns; signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any public street or
public place; the creation, by means of any such signaling, of unreasonably
loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable length of time. An exception to the foregoing is the use of any
such signaling device as a warning of danger.
      (2)   Radios; phonographs; and the like. The use or operation of any
radio, phonograph, television, tape recorder, loudspeaker, musical instrument
or any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound or for
amplifying sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
persons of ordinary sensibilities, or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. It is prima facie unlawful for a person to use or
operate any such machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of 80 feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it
is located.
      (3)   Yelling; shouting.  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity.
      (4)   Drums.  The use of any drum or other similar instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention, by creation of noise, to any
performance, show or sale.
      (5)   Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns.  The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material,
over and along streets and public places, upon carts, cars, trucks or in any
other manner, or loaded, so as to cause loud noises or to disturb the peace,
quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities.
      (6)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like used on outside construction. 
The operation, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day, of any pile driver, pneumatic hammer, grinder, shredder, derrick or other
equipment or appliance used in outside construction, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise, in any zoning district in the city, which
disturbs the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary
sensibilities living or working in residential or office-residential zoning
districts in the city.
   (d)   Emergencies.  In the event of an emergency as determined by the Mayor
or his or her designee, the provisions of this section may be waived by either
of the persons.
   (e)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19-94, passed 9-6-1994)
§ 648.13  OPERATION OF SOUND TRUCKS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any sound truck
within the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation. However, in the
event of a public disaster, act of God or other emergency, any public utility
company may disseminate information to the public by sound-amplifying
equipment.
   (b)   In the event of an emergency as determined by the Mayor or his or her
designee, the provisions of this section may be waived by either of the
persons.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19-94, passed 9-6-1994)
§ 648.14  ZONES OF QUIET.
   (a)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet in
the vicinity of any school, church or hospital, no person shall cause or permit
to be caused any unnecessary noise, or sound the horn or other device of a
motor vehicle, except in the case of an emergency, upon the streets or alleys
within any such zone of quiet, that disturbs or unduly annoys the patients of
any hospital or the pupils of any public or parochial school or which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution.
   (b)   In the event of an emergency as determined by the Mayor or his or her
designee, the provisions of this section may be waived by either of the
persons.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19-94, passed 9-6-1994)
§ 648.15  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
   (a)   No person shall use or operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle so out
of repair, so loaded or so operated as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons of ordinary
sensibilities.
   (b)   No person shall equip a motor vehicle or motorcycle with and use any
device which creates loud or excessive noise.  However, nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the blowing of horns when necessary to prevent an accident
or the use of sirens or similar devices on authorized emergency and public
safety vehicles.
   (c)   No operator or passenger of a motor vehicle or motorcycle shall
operate, or permit the operation of, any sound amplification system which can
be heard outside the vehicle from 50 feet or more when the vehicle is being
operated upon a street, highway, alley or parking lot. The term "sound
amplification system" includes any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human
voice, or any other noise or sound.
   (d)   In the event of an emergency as determined by the Mayor or his or her
designee, the provisions of this section may be waived by either of the
persons.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19-94, passed 9-6-1994)
§ 648.16  RESERVED.
§ 648.17  HARASSMENT BY LASER BEAMS.
   (a)   No person shall focus, point or shine a laser beam, directly or
indirectly, onto another person or animal in such a manner as to harass or
annoy the person or animal.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1996 Code, § 648.17)  (Ord. 13-99, passed 4-19-1999)
CHAPTER 660:  SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
   
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners
   
660.02   Spreading contagion
   
660.03   Littering; accumulations of litter
   
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
   
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
   
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
   
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles
   
660.08   Open burning
   
660.09   Barricades and warning lights
   
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury
   
660.11   Filling and draining of lots, cellars and the like; removal of putrid
substances and obstructions
   
660.12   Dumping into sewers, ditches, watercourses and the like
   
660.13   Smoking in places of public assembly
   
660.14   Tobacco use in city buildings and vehicles
   
660.15   Use of public areas as privies
Cross-reference:
   Animal nuisances, see §
618.13
   Disposing of animal wastes, see §
618.20
   Harassment by laser beams, see §
648.16
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles, see §
432.42
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.17
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see §
412.01
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Riot, see §§
648.01 et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see
Ch. 438
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 678
   Weeds, see
Ch. 662
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see §
452.05
Statutory reference:
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
§ 660.01  VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10.  No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use."
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02  SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that he or
she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to
take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to other
persons, except when seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she knows or
has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous, contagious
disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to protect others
from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the
existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using the conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03  LITTERING; ACCUMULATIONS OF LITTER.
   (a)   No person shall throw or deposit, or permit to be thrown or deposited,
any dirt, paper or sweepings of any store, house, shop or office, or any ashes,
shavings, filthy water, offal, straw, wood, manure, stones, earth, refuse
matter, brush or rubbish of any kind whatever, into any street or other public
way or ground.
   (b)   Upon the finding by Council or the City Health Commissioner that
litter has been placed or accumulated upon any land within the city and has not
been removed, and that it constitutes a detriment to the public health, Council
or the City Health Commissioner shall cause written notice to be served upon
the owner, and if different, upon the lessee, agent or tenant having charge of
the littered land, notifying him or her that the litter is on the land and that
it must be collected and removed within 48 hours after service of the notice.
   (c)   As used in this section, "litter" includes any garbage, waste,
peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles or other motor vehicles, wagons,
furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature or anything else of
an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   If the owner or other person having charge of the land is a
nonresident of the city whose address is known, notice shall be sent to him or
her by certified mail.  If the address of the owner or other person having
charge of the land is unknown, then it is sufficient to publish the notice once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   (e)   This section does not apply to land being used under a municipal
building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or license or a
conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junk yard, scrap metal
processing facility or similar businesses, or a permit or license issued
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 and §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12 or Chapter 6111.
   (f)   If the owner, lessee, tenant or agent having charge of the lands upon
which the litter has been placed fails to comply with the notice of this
section, Council or the City Health Commissioner shall cause the litter to be
removed and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task.  All expenses
incurred therein shall, when approved by Council, be paid out of any money in
the General Fund which is not otherwise appropriated.
   (g)   The expenses of the removal of litter shall be charged to the owner of
the lot and if the same are not paid within 30 days from the receipt of the
bill for the same from the city, the entire cost of the removal shall be
assessed and certified by the County Auditor for collection as special taxes
and assessment.  This remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in
division (h) of this section.
   (h)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
for any subsequent offense. 
(Ord. 15-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 660.04  NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert the
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
"agriculture" is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.06  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a
dealer, warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07  STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section "junk motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle
which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, the damage including
but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor or
transmission; apparently inoperable; and having a fair market value of $1,500
or less, that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than
72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or
regulated under the authority of the municipality; or if the property on which
the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any
governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of
the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide
commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector's vehicle, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(F).
   (b)   No person shall be prevented from storing or keeping, or restricted in
the method of storing or keeping, any collector's vehicle on private property
with the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, except that a person having such permission may be required to
conceal, by means of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable
obstruction, any unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open.
   (c)   The Chief of Police may send notice, by personal service or by
certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having the right to
the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that
within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall
be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure or shall be
removed from the property.
   (d)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in the
open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense. 
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.65)
§ 660.08  OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Specifically. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   "Agricultural waste." Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings; garbage; dead animals;
animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor economic poisons and
containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified open burning as a
safe disposal procedure.
         B.   "Economic poisons." Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         C.   "Emergency burning." The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm or an ice storm.
         D.   "Garbage." Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         E.   "Land clearing waste." Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial or industrial development. "Land clearing
waste" also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         F.   "Landscape waste." Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.
         G.   "Ohio EPA." The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         H.   "Open burning." The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. "Open burning" includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
3745-17-10.
         I.   "Residential waste." Any waste material, including landscape
wastes, generated on a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result of
residential activities, but not including garbage.
         J.   "Restricted area." The following:
            1.   Except as provided in division 2. of this definition, the area
within the boundary of any municipal corporation established in accordance with
the provisions of R.C. Title 7, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the
boundaries of any such municipal corporation having a population of 1,000 to
10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any such municipal
corporation having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
            2.   "Restricted area" shall not include any municipal corporation
the territory of which is located on an island in Lake Erie except that, during
the yearly period between Memorial Day and Labor Day, any such municipal
corporation shall be required to comply with the requirements of division (c)
of this section.
         K.   "Unrestricted area." All areas outside the boundaries of a
"restricted area" as defined above.
      (2)   Incorporation by reference. This section includes references to
certain matter or materials. The text of the incorporated materials is not
included in the regulations contained in this section. The materials are hereby
made a part of the regulations in this section. For materials subject to
change, only the specific version specified in the regulation are incorporated.
Material is incorporated as it exists on the effective date of this section.
Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code of
Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not incorporated unless and until this rule has been amended to
specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The materials incorporated by reference are
available as follows: National Fire Protection Association – Information on the
National Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting association
at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-3000. Codes
may be ordered online at: www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of the
code are available at most public libraries and at the State Library of Ohio.
         B.   Incorporated materials. The following material is incorporated:
NFPA publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions, Chapter 4,
Acquired Structures, November 2001 Edition.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (b) to (d) of this section or
in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal
verification to the Ohio EPA from the local health department, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt
or liquid petroleum products.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association's (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, "Acquired Structures," provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, range or wildlife
management practices; and
         E.   Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing at least ten working days before the fire is to be set. Saturday,
Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a working day. It shall be in
such form and contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature of quantities of material to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants; and will have no serious detrimental
effect upon adjacent properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may
impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy's
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   The notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty.  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.09  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk,
playground or other public place any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage property of another or injure any person or
animal traveling along or upon the sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of all owners or occupants of property fronting
on the streets of the city to cause the sidewalks and gutters in front of the
properties to be kept clear of all rubbish, snow, grass, leaves or any other
substances that may accumulate on the same.  If any such owner or occupant
refuses or neglects to remove rubbish, snow, grass, leaves or other substances
within 24 hours after being notified to do so by the Superintendent of Streets
and Sewers, the Superintendent shall cause the same to be removed and the
expense of the removal shall be recovered against the person so offending by an
action in the proper court, brought by the city against the person.
(1923 Code, § 205)
   (c)   No goods, merchandise, boxes, barrels or other articles shall be
placed, maintained or kept in front of any store, shop or other place in the
city, on or above the sidewalks or in or upon any alley. However, special
permits may be granted by resolution of Council for any projection over any
sidewalk. No person shall erect or cause to be erected any porch, portico,
veranda, stair, steps, arbor, cellar door or other projection contrary to the
provisions of this section.
   (d)   No person shall blockade or place any obstruction of any kind whatever
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground of the city.
   (e)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across, any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect it against
damage or injury.  The affected area shall be rendered safe and free from
danger.
   (f)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous condition.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1986 Code, § 521.04)  (Ord. 179, passed 7-2-1928; Ord. 1-81, passed 1-5-1981;
Ord. 19-2008, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 660.11  FILLING AND DRAINING OF LOTS, CELLARS AND THE LIKE; REMOVAL OF PUTRID
SUBSTANCES AND OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (b)   No person owning or controlling, as a tenant, agent or otherwise, any
cellar, lot or parcel of land upon or in which water stands or collects or
which is moist or wet by reason of a want of drains or sewers, or by reason of
defective drains or sewers, shall fail to drain or sewer the same so as to make
the same healthy and dry.
(1986 Code, § 521.13)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12  DUMPING INTO SEWERS, DITCHES, WATERCOURSES AND THE LIKE.
   (a)   The deliberate or unintentional disposal of grass clippings, brush,
fill, trash, debris, obstructions or unwanted materials into storm sewers,
ditches, streams, rivers or retention basins that regularly or periodically
carry surface water runoff, or within or along banks of man-made or natural
watercourses, or in adjacent floodplain areas, which may wash into streams and
sewers, is prohibited.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service or his or her designee shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation and measurement in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing ten days for the
satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (d)   Whoever continues a violation of this section beyond the time limit
provided for in division (c) of this section shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each 24-hour
period that a violation continues.  Hours of community service may be
substituted for a cash fine if the service is devoted to remedying the impact
of obstructions in rivers, creeks and ditches.
(Ord. 6-93, passed 2-16-1993)
§ 660.13  SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, "place of public assembly" means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for the mentally disabled and the mentally ill; university
and college buildings, except rooms within those buildings used primarily as
the residences of students or other persons affiliated with the university or
college; office buildings; libraries; museums; and vehicles used in public
transportation.  That portion of a building or other enclosed structure that is
owned by the state, a state agency or a political subdivision, and that is used
primarily as a food service establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public.  Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety.  The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area.  In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area.  In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking
area.  In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also
included in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to
designate the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate
the no smoking area.  A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly.  Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are
clearly visible and that state "no smoking."  No person shall remove signs from
areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 660.14  TOBACCO USE IN CITY BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall use any product containing tobacco within any building
owned, leased, rented or occupied by the city or inside any motor vehicle owned
or leased by the city.
   (b)   Signs shall be posted in appropriate locations indicating the
prohibition of tobacco use.
   (c)   No person shall remove, deface or destroy any sign indicating "No
Tobacco Use" or similar sign indicating the prohibition of tobacco.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 12-93, passed 5-17-1993; Ord. 16-2004, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2-2008,
passed 1-22-2008)
§ 660.15  USE OF PUBLIC AREAS AS PRIVIES.
   (a)   No opening between or in the rear of any building, no street or alley,
public or private, and no public grounds or place used as such, shall at any
time be used as a water closet or privy, nor shall any water or other substance
or liquid be thrown from any window or other opening in buildings, public or
private, at any time.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1986 Code, § 521.14)
CHAPTER 662:  WEEDS
Section
   
662.01   Cutting and removal required
   
662.02   Notice to cut and remove
   
662.03   Procedure when failure to comply occurs
   
662.04   Responsibility of adjacent owner
   
662.05   Application of chapter
   
662.06   Effective date
 
   
662.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Director of Public Service, see
Ch. 242
Statutory reference:
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
§ 662.01  CUTTING AND REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   The owner or occupant, or any other person, firm or corporation,
having maintenance responsibility for any lot or land within the city, shall,
between April 1 and October 31, cut down any and all offensive and noxious
weeds, vines and grasses of a height of eight inches or more constituting a
threat to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare as determined by the
Director of Public Service or his or her designated agent. Weeds and grasses
growing in stoned or paved areas, such as but not limited to parking lots, are
also included.
   (b)   The owner or occupant or any other person, firm or corporation having
maintenance responsibility for any lot or land within the city, shall remove
all cuttings, except compost, constituting a threat to the public health,
safety, comfort or welfare as determined by the Director of Public Service or
his or her designated agent. The cuttings cannot be placed on the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or other rights-of-way or public lands.
   (c)   "Owner or occupant, or any other person, firm or corporation, having
maintenance responsibility" means any person who, alone or jointly or severally
with others, has legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or has charge, care or control of any
dwelling or dwelling unit, as an owner or an agent of the owner, or as a
fiduciary, including but not limited to the executor, the administrator, the
trustee, the receiver or the guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in
possession, regardless of how the possession was obtained.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 5-2008,
passed 3-3-2008)
§ 662.02  NOTICE TO CUT AND REMOVE.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service shall cause an annual notice in the
month of March to be published in newspapers of general circulation in the city
notifying the residents and businesses of the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   When the Director of Public Service or his or her designated agent
determines that the weeds and grasses as described in §
662.01(a) exist, he or she shall forthwith serve written notice upon the owner
or occupant, or any other person, firm or corporation having maintenance
responsibility for the lot or land, ordering the cutting and removal of the
weeds and grasses.
   (c)   Written notice may be served in any of the following ways:
      (1)   By posting the written notice on or near the main entrance to the
primary structure on the premises, or if there is no structure on the premises,
by posting the written notice elsewhere on the property in a prominent
location; or
      (2)   In any manner allowed under the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (d)   The owner or occupant or any other person, firm or corporation having
maintenance responsibility for a lot or land shall comply with the notice
provided in this section within three days from service.
   (e)   Only one notice per 24 months under this section is required for a lot
or parcel. If, after a notice has been served in accordance with this section,
and the Director of Public Service, or his or her designated agent, determines
that a subsequent violation has occurred, the city may proceed with the remedy
set forth in §
662.03 without further notice.
   (f)   In the event that the city is forced to proceed with the remedy set
forth in §
662.03, said remedy shall serve as notice (as required by §
662.02(e)) for 24 months following the city's completion of the remedy.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 20-2010,
passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 23-2013, passed 5-20-2013)
§ 662.03  PROCEDURE WHEN FAILURE TO COMPLY OCCURS.
   (a)   If the owner or occupant or any other person, firm or corporation
having the maintenance responsibility for the properties mentioned in §
662.01 fails to comply with the notice provided for in §
662.02, the city shall cause or contract the weeds and grasses to be cut and
removed. This cutting and removing shall be at the owner's expense, and all
costs of labor, equipment wear and tear and the like, together with an
administrative fee of 20% shall be assessed. The administrative fee shall not
exceed $200 per occurrence.
   (b)   An invoice of such charges and assessments shall be sent by certified
mail to the owner of the lot or land charged therewith or his or her agent. If
the invoice of assessment is not paid in full within 30 days, it shall be
certified by the Clerk of Council to the County Auditor to be placed on the tax
duplicate and collected as other taxes are collected.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 662.04  RESPONSIBILITY OF ADJACENT OWNER.
   The owner, occupant or custodian of each lot adjacent to a street or alley
shall be responsible for the area between the curb and sidewalk, or between the
edge of the street and the property line. The area between the centerline of an
alley or unimproved street to the property line of an adjacent lot is the
responsibility of the lot owner or occupant or custodian.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 662.05  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all properties within
the city that include an occupied or unoccupied residence or place of business.
   (b)   Properties within the city, which do not include a residence or place
of business and have road frontage, shall comply for at least 25 feet from the
edge of the road.
   (c)   Properties within the city, which do not include a residence or place
of business and are more than 25 feet from the edge of a road or without road
frontage, may be granted a variance by the Safety/Service Director requiring
routine mowing once a month from April 1 to October 31.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 662.06  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective January 1, 2007.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 662.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever fails to comply with a written or published notice according to §
662.02 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor with a maximum fine of $150. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 24-2003, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 26-2006, passed 11-6-2006)
CHAPTER 666:  SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
   
666.01   Definitions
   
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
666.03   Sexual imposition
   
666.04   Polygraph examinations for victims; restrictions on use
   
666.05   Voyeurism
   
666.06   Public indecency
   
666.07   Procuring
   
666.08   Soliciting
   
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation
   
666.09   Prostitution
   
666.10   Rules of evidence
   
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.12   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.13   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.14   Presumptions; notice
   
666.15   Declaratory judgment
   
666.16   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
666.17   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
666.18   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
666.19   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Cross-reference:
   Criminal child enticement, see §
636.09
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Sentencing generally, see
Ch. 698
   Spreading contagion, see §
660.02
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 through 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C.§ 2945.481
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see R.C. §
2907.27
   Power to restrain houses of ill fame, see R.C. § 715.52
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
§ 666.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Harmful to juveniles."  That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   "Juvenile."  Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   "Material."  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or
similar data storage device.
   (d)   "Mental health client or patient." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.
   (e)   "Mental health professional." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.115.
   (f)   "Minor."  A person under the age of 18.
   (g)   "Nudity."  The showing, representation or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering,
or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (h)   "Obscene."  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is "obscene" if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   (i)   "Performance."  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show,
skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (j)   "Prostitute."  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (k)   "Sado-masochistic abuse." Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
   (l)   "Sexual activity."  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (m)   "Sexual conduct."  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (n)   "Sexual contact."  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (o)   "Sexual excitement."  The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (p)   "Spouse."  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that the person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 666.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, § 2907.03 or § 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 666.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of the other
person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or
touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender has been convicted previously
of a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, § 2907.03, § 2907.04, §
2907.05, § 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor or other public official shall not
ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph
examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of the alleged
sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   “Polygraph examination.” Any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      (3)   “Prosecution.” The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      (4)   “Prosecutor.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      (5)   “Public official.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      (6)   “Sex offense.” A violation of any provision of §§
666.02,
666.03,
666.05 or
666.06 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 666.05  VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph or otherwise record the other
person in a state of nudity.
   (c)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, otherwise record, or spy or
eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other person is a
minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 666.06  PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides
in the person’s household:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4) and (c)(5) of
this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section  is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (d)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)  (1996 Code, § 666.06)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 666.07  PROCURING.
   (a)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (b)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
§ 666.08  SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall solicit another to engage with the other person in
sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of division
(a) of this section and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit
the violation, was in, was on or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition
to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, shall
impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the person's driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6).
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §
2907.24(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.085  LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Public place." Any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   "Vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage in
solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §
2907.241(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.09  PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §
2907.25(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.10  RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of the place and as to the reputation of
the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of whether
the place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of the person is admissible on the
question of whether the person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused's spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or §
666.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 666.11  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
§ 666.12  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Harmful to juveniles." Any material or performance if it is
offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles and if any of the following applies:
         A.   It tends to appeal to the prurient interest of juveniles;
         B.   It contains a display, description or representation of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity;
         C.   It contains a display, description or representation of
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
         D.   It contains a display, description or representation of human
bodily functions of elimination;
         E.   It makes repeated use of foul language;
         F.   It contains a display, description or representation in lurid
detail of the violent physical torture, dismemberment, destruction or death of
a human being;
         G.   It contains a display, description or representation of criminal
activity that tends to glorify or glamorize the activity and that, with respect
to juveniles, has a dominant tendency to corrupt.
      (2)   "Material." Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record,
tape or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound
or touch.
   (b)   Restrictions on exhibition of material.  No person shall exhibit or
display for sale any material which is harmful to juveniles unless the material
is exhibited or displayed in a portion of the business premises which is
inaccessible to juveniles or unless the material is exhibited or displayed in a
manner that prohibits examination or observation by juveniles. 
   (c)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord 4-84, passed 3-19-1984)
§ 666.13  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
§ 666.14  PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of the material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which the notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality.  This notice,
regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender,
identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or
harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of the notice.
   (c)   Section
666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator's or projectionist's place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.12 and
666.15(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
666.11, §
666.12 or §
666.15 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
666.11, §
666.12 or §
666.15 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
666.11, §
666.12 or §
666.15 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of the employee's or agent's
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or agent's
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
666.11 or §
666.12 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 666.15  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 666.16  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or § 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief
legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to enjoin the violation. 
The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the merits
within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
§ 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
§ 666.17  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Commercial establishment." An entity that is open to the public
and to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   "Visual materials or performances." Films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or
other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 666.18  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Adult arcade." Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (2)   "Adult bookstore," "adult novelty store" or "adult video store."
         A.   A commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant
or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or maintains
a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of
any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials exhibiting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   "Adult cabaret." A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   "Adult entertainment." The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   "Adult entertainment establishment." An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited
to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an "adult
entertainment establishment".
      (6)   "Adult motion picture theater." A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   "Adult theater." A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   "Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon." The
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas", the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (9)   "Nude or seminude model studio." Any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a "nude or seminude model studio" and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   "Nudity," "nude" or "state of nudity." The showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   "Regularly features" or "regularly shown." A consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   "Seminude" or "state of seminudity." A state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      (13)   "Sexual encounter establishment."
         A.   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a "sexual encounter
establishment".
      (14)   "Specified anatomical areas." The cleft of the buttocks, anus,
male or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   "Specified sexual activity." Any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual's name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver's or commercial
driver's license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar's or Deputy
Registrar's possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 666.19  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Adult bookstore" or "adult video store." A commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade or inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   "Adult cabaret." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      (3)   "Adult motion picture theater." A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   "Characterized by." Describing the essential character or quality
of an item.
      (5)   "Employee." Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      (6)   "Nudity," "nude," or "state of nudity." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.39.
      (7)   "Operator." Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   "Patron."  Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee's or volunteer's
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   "Premises." The real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including but
not limited to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   "Regularly." Consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   "Seminude" or "state of seminudity." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.39.
      (12)   "Sexual device." Any three-dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but
not limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations of
the human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   "Sexual device shop." A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   "Sexual encounter center." A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form
of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      (15)   "Sexually oriented business." An adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   "Specified anatomical areas." Includes human genitals, pubic
region and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
      (17)   "Specified sexual activity." Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 a.m. midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers
appear nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee's immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee's immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee's immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 666.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender's sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender's duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06,
and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the
time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under
R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that
section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the
duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 668:  CRIMINAL CONDUCT IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
668.01   Purpose and intent
   
668.02   Definitions
   
668.03   Unlawful activities
   
668.04   Scienter required to prove violation or business liability
   
668.05   Penalty; equitable remedies
   
668.06   Severability
§ 668.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city in enacting this chapter to regulate in the
specified manner adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the citizens of this city and establish reasonable regulations to prevent
the deleterious secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments and
sexually oriented businesses within this city. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the city in enacting this chapter
to restrict or deny, or authorize the restriction or denial of, access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny, or authorize the denial of, access by the distributors and exhibitors of
adult entertainment and adult materials to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of the city in enacting this chapter to condone or
legitimize the distribution or exhibition of obscene material.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 668.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this chapter:
      (1)   “Adult bookstore,” “adult cabaret,” “adult motion picture theater,”
“adult video store,” “characterized by,” “nude,” “nudity,” “state of nudity,”
“seminude,” “state of seminudity,” “sexual device,” “sexual device shop,”
“sexual encounter establishment,” and “specified anatomical areas” have the
same meanings as in § 838.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Shelby;
and
      (2)   “Adult arcade,” “adult entertainment,” “adult entertainment
establishment,” “adult novelty store,” “adult theater,” “distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon,” “nude or seminude model studio,”
“regularly features,” “regularly shown,” and “sexual encounter establishment”
have the same meanings as in § 838.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Shelby.
   (b)   “Employee” means any individual on a full-time, part-time, or contract
basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
   (c)   “Immediate family” means a person's spouse residing in the person's
household, parents, siblings of the whole or of the half blood, and children,
including adopted children.
   (d)   “License” means a license to act or operate a sexually oriented
business, issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (e)   “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate has been
issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the license application as
principally responsible for the operation of the sexually oriented business.
With respect to an employee license issued under this chapter, “licensee” means
an employee as defined by division (b) above in whose name a license has been
issued authorizing employment at a sexually oriented business.
   (f)   “Operate” means to control or hold primary responsibility for the
operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business entity, as an
individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility.
“Operate” or “Cause to be operated” shall mean to cause to function or to put
or keep in operation.
   (g)   “Operator” means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be
operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not
that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
   (h)   “Patron” means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, except for any of the following:
      (1)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
      (2)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
      (3)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee's or volunteer's
duties as a public employee or volunteer's duties as a public employee or
volunteer.
   (i)   “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm,
association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of
whatever form or character.
   (j)   “Premises” means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
   (k)   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater,
adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, sexual device shop,
sexual encounter center, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or adult
motel as defined by § 838.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Shelby,
but does not include a business solely by reason of its showing, selling, or
renting materials that may depict sex.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 668.03  UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended, or shall be construed,
to permit or authorize activities which are unlawful under state law or city
ordinance. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for an operator to
knowingly or intentionally violate the provisions of this chapter or to allow,
either knowingly or intentionally, an employee or a patron to violate the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the
person prosecuted was powerless to prevent the violation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly, in a sexually oriented business, appear
before a patron or patrons in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such
public nudity is expressive in nature.
   (c)   No employee shall knowingly, in a sexually oriented business, appear
within view of any patron in a seminude condition unless the employee, while
seminude, shall be and remain at least six feet from all patrons and on a fixed
stage at least 24 inches from the floor and at least 36 inches from all parts
of a clearly designated area in which patrons will be present.
   (d)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the
premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms,
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. If the premises has
two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this
division must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the
duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and
situated in an operator's station at all times that any patron is on the
portion of the premises monitored by that operator station. It shall be the
duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on
the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this division remains
unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the
premises. Premises which operate as an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult novelty store or sexual device shop are exempt from the operator's
station requirements as set forth above.
   (e)   Sexually oriented businesses that do not have stages or interior
configurations which meet at least the minimum requirements of this section
shall be given 180 days from the effective date of § 668.03 of this chapter to
comply with the stage and building requirements of this section. During said
180 days, any employee who appears within view of any patron in a seminude
condition shall nevertheless remain, while seminude, at least six feet from all
patrons.
   (f)   No patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family shall
knowingly touch an employee while that employee is nude or seminude or touch
the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
   (g)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises of
a sexually oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch
a patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or the clothing
of a patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or allow the
patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family to touch the
employee or the clothing of the employee.
   (h)   Minors prohibited. No person under the age of 18 years shall be
permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   (i)   No operator of a sexually oriented business shall recklessly employ a
person who has been convicted of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, 2907.07, 2907.08(B), (C) or (D), 2907.21, 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, 2907.25, 2907.31, 2907.311, 2907.32(A)(1)(3),
2907.321, 2907.322, 2907.323, 2907.33 or 2907.34, or any other equivalent
municipal ordinance offense, or other equivalent offense in another state, to
work in such business.
   (j)   Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business shall be or remain
open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that
a sexually oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4303 may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does
not conduct, offer, or allow sexually oriented business activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (k)   The provisions of §
668.03 shall not apply to an employee's use of any restroom or any single- sex
dressing room that is accessible only to employees, and live performances in
which the patron and employee are separated by an impenetrable barrier such as,
but not limited to, glass or Plexiglas.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 668.04  SCIENTER REQUIRED TO PROVE VIOLATION OR BUSINESS LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental
state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state is
necessary to establish a violation of a provision of §
668.03 of this chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the
purposes of §
668.03, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the sexually oriented
business for purposes of finding a violation of §
668.03 only if an officer, director, general partner or licensee, or a person
who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises,
knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be
a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was
powerless to prevent the act.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 668.05  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Any person, business, or entity violating or refusing to comply with §
668.03(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (h) shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist or occur, and each separate occurrence, shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, any premises in which a sexually oriented business, as
defined in §
668.02(k) of this chapter, is repeatedly operated or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be
subject to civil abatement proceedings initiated by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist or
occur shall constitute a separate operation or maintenance of the violation.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
668.03(f) or (g) of this chapter shall be guilty of illegal sexually oriented
activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender touches a specified
anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a specified
anatomical area, a violation of §
668.03(f) or (g) of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender does not touch a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee,
or the clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of §
668.03(f) or (g) of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Whoever violates §
668.03(i) is guilty of illegally employing a sex offender, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
   (d)   Whoever violates §
668.03(j) is guilty of illegally operating a sexually oriented business, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Notwithstanding §
668.05, the city may employ any remedy available at law or in equity to prevent
or remedy a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 668.06  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph or clause of this chapter shall be
deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the
remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, and clauses shall not be affected.
(Ord. 25-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
CHAPTER 672:  THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
   
672.01   Theft
   
672.02   Receiving stolen property
   
672.03   Determining property value in theft offense
   
672.04   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
672.045   Evidence of theft of rented property
   
672.05   Tampering with coin machines
   
672.06   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
672.07   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
672.08   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass
   
672.09   Passing bad checks
   
672.10   Misuse of credit cards
   
672.11   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
672.12   Forging or selling forged identification cards
   
672.125   Criminal simulation
   
672.13   Making or using slugs
   
672.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
672.15   Tampering with records
   
672.16   Securing writings by deception
   
672.17   Personating an officer
   
672.18   Defrauding creditors
   
672.19   Medicaid fraud
   
672.20   Insurance fraud
   
672.21   Workers' compensation fraud
   
672.22   Reserved
   
672.23   Motion picture piracy
   
672.24   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
Cross-reference:
   Definitions relating to theft and fraud, see §
642.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
608.17
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
608.16
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.12
   Possession of municipal property, see §
642.02
   Unauthorized use of property, see §
642.03
§ 672.01  THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft.  Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog; or
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (c)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (c)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license, permit or privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension
shall be at least six months.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include but is
not limited to the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (e)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (c) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 672.02  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01; or
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 672.03  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), § 2913.02, § 2913.03 or §
2913.04, § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or § 2913.31 or § 2913.43 involving a
victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender's same employment, capacity or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense.  The value
of the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose
of determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
§ 2913.02, § 2913.03 or § 2913.04, § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or § 2913.31 or §
2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one victim,
involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, 
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value
as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services.  As used in this section,
"fair market value" is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B)-(E))
§ 672.04  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
672.01 or §
672.02 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed by
R.C. § 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or sticker as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 672.045  EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Rentee."  A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   "Renter."  A person who owns rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property.  The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee's agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services.  The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
§ 672.05  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 672.06  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Tamper."  To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
      (2)   “Utility.” Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipeline company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8),
its lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by
a political subdivision.
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8), or its
lessees, trustees or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that
tampering with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could
result in the imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 672.07  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, "public transportation system" means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.71, or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer's duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the Treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the Treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 672.08  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state or keep
possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 672.09  PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Check."  Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   "Issue a check."  Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check, bill of exchange or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with R.C. § 1349.16 by doing any of the
following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family or
household purposes at a financial institution:
      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a valid driver's
or commercial driver's license or identification card issued under R.C. §
4507.50;
      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another identification document
that contains false information;
      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's current
address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the
financial institution.
   (e)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (f)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks.  Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 672.10  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1) or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 672.11  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party's Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle. 
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99)
§ 672.12  FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, "identification card" means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words "identity", "identification", "identification card" or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging identification
cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or selling or
distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (a) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification
cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 672.125  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more,
criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 672.13  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 672.14  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 672.15  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 672.16  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property
or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law.  If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person or disabled adult, securing writings by deception
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 672.17  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
§ 672.18  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 672.19  MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Medical assistance program." The program established by the Ohio
Department of Job and Family Services to provide medical assistance under R.C.
§ 5111.01 and the Medicaid program of Title XIX of the "Social Security Act",
49 Stat. 620 (1935), 42 U.S.C. § 301, as amended.
      (2)   "Provider." Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Ohio Department of Job and Family Services to provide goods or services
pursuant to the medical assistance program or any person who has signed an
agreement with a party to such a provider agreement under which the person
agrees to provide goods or services that are reimbursable under the medical
assistance program.
      (3)   "Provider agreement." An oral or written agreement between the Ohio
Department of Job and Family Services and a person in which the person agrees
to provide goods or services under the medical assistance program.
      (4)   "Recipient." Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the medical assistance program.
      (5)   "Records." Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Ohio
Director of Job and Family Services to be kept for the medical assistance
program.
      (6)   "Statement or representation." Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the medical
assistance program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to
determine a rate of reimbursement under the medical assistance program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the medical assistance program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person's provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the medical assistance program any property, money or other consideration in
addition to the amount of reimbursement under the medical assistance program
and the person's provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5111.0112 or rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 5111.01, § 5111.011 or § 5111.02.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5111.0112 or rules adopted under R.C. §
5111.01, § 5111.011 or § 5111.02, in cash or in kind, including but not limited
to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or services
for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the medical
assistance program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the medical assistance program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the medical
assistance program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the medical assistance program to which the person is not entitled to pay to
the applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case.  The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or §
5111.03, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for Medicaid benefits or in a document that requires a disclosure of assets for
the purpose of determining eligibility to receive Medicaid benefits:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for Medicaid benefits or the recipient of Medicaid benefits or to a
revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid benefits paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid benefits
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid benefits for which
the applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate
applicable to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the
benefits were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid benefits or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility to receive
Medicaid benefits all of the interests in property of the applicant for or
recipient of Medicaid benefits, all transfers of property by the applicant for
or recipient of Medicaid benefits, and the circumstances of all those
transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid benefits recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   "Medicaid benefits." Benefits under the medical assistance
program established under R.C. Chapter 5111.
         B.   "Property." Any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 672.20  INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Data." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   "Deceptive." A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another
to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including
but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   "Insurer." Any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
      (4)   "Policy." A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   "Statement." Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000
or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C.
§ 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47)
§ 672.21  WORKERS' COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers' compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, Chapter 4123, Chapter 4127 or Chapter 4131 or
to secure workers' compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121,
Chapter 4123, Chapter 4127 or Chapter 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers' compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers' compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers' compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers' compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers' compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in division (a)(5), (a)(6) or
(a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case.  These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Claim." Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers' Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers' compensation benefits.
      (2)   "Employer," "employee," and "self-insuring employer." Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.
      (3)   "Employment." Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   "False." Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   "Goods." Includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers' compensation benefits.
      (6)   "Records." Any medical, professional, financial or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers' compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   "Remuneration." Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   "Services." Includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers' compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers' compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   "Statement." Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   "Workers' compensation benefits." Any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, Chapter 4123, Chapter 4127 or Chapter 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
§ 672.22  RESERVED.
§ 672.23  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Audiovisual recording function.” The capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   “Facility.” A movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)  (1996 Code, § 672.23)
§ 672.24  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
CHAPTER 678:  WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
678.01   Definitions
   
678.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
678.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
678.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
678.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
678.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
678.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
678.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
678.08   Sale of weapons to minors
   
678.085   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun
   
678.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
678.095   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises
   
678.10   Fireworks
   
678.11   Endangering aircraft and airport operations
   
678.12   Possessing criminal tools
   
678.13   Throwing or shooting missiles
   
678.14   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
678.15   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
678.16   Defaced firearms
   
678.17   Concealed handgun possession on city owned property/buildings
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Hunting prohibited, see §
618.12
   Posting firearm warning signs, see §
612.06
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see §
608.04
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see R.C. §
3761.16
§ 678.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Automatic firearm."  Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger. 
"Automatic firearm" also means any semi-automatic firearm designed or specially
adapted to fire more than 31 cartridges without reloading, other than a firearm
chambering only .22 caliber short, long or long-rifle cartridges.
   (b)   "Ballistic knife."  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled
by a spring-operated mechanism.
   (c)   "Dangerous ordnance."
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or silencer.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   "Dangerous ordnance" does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act" of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
   (d)   "Deadly weapon."  Any instrument, device or thing capable of
inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or
possessed, carried or used as a weapon.
   (e)   "Explosive."  Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  "Explosive" includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3
or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  "Explosives" does not include
"fireworks", as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material
otherwise meeting the definition of "explosive" set forth in this section that
is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity
described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to
the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.
   (f)   "Explosive device."  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.  "Explosive
device" includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (g)   "Firearm."
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant.  "Firearm"
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   (h)   "Handgun."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (i)   "Incendiary device."  Any firebomb, and any device designed or
specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of
fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite
it.
   (j)   "Sawed-off firearm."  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches
long, or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle
less than 26 inches long overall.
   (k)   "Semi-automatic firearm."  Any firearm designed or specially adapted
to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge
ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (l)   "Zip-gun."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 678.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a license or temporary emergency license
to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 or a license
to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the
Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is
carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the
person has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a
concealed handgun and that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's
hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person's hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is
stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep
the person's hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person;
         C.   A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor's person;
         D.   A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor's own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who,
at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, is carrying a
valid license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun
issued to the person under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 or a license to carry
a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the Attorney
General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69, unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.
   (e)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be
required to obtain a license or temporary emergency license to carry a
concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (f)(2) of
this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in
this division or division (f)(2) of this section, if the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of violence, if
the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the
offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous
ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as
otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section, if the offense is
committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon
aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section promptly produces a valid license or temporary emergency license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 or a
license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with
which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C.
§ 109.69, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person
for a violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce
any of those types of license and if the person is not in a place described in
that section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that
division, and the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
that was issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69, which license was valid at
the time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting
officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a license to carry a
concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun that was issued by another state with which the Attorney General has
entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69 and that was similar
in nature to a license issued under R.C. § 2923.125, and that license expired
within the two years immediately preceding the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents any
type of license identified in division (f)(2)A.1. of this section to the law
enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives
in writing the offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the
violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         C.   If neither division (f)(2)A. nor (f)(2)B. of this section
applies, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) of this section.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section, the offender's license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).  If, at the time of the stop of the offender
for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law
enforcement officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the
offender has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a
concealed handgun, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1)
of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's license or temporary
emergency license to carry a concealed handgun shall not be suspended pursuant
to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender's license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop.  If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through County Sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 678.025  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   "Detention" and "detention facility" have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law. 
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 678.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 678.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless  the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a license or temporary emergency license
to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to
carry a concealed handgun that was issued to the person by another state with
which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C.
§ 109.69, who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped
as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or
is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by
an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in
R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor
vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;
      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a license or temporary
emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the person then
possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person removes, attempts to remove, grasps, holds, or has
contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by the law enforcement officer;
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer's, agent's or employee's duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary electric-
powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle
that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of
Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered all-
purpose vehicle sign.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is carrying a
valid license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun
issued to the person under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 or a license to carry
a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the Attorney
General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for
a wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is
owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife, provided that the road is
identified by an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle sign.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary
emergency license to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or §
2923.1213 as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was the basis of
the violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on
or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to
a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as the division existed
prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section
on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of division (f)(5) of
this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file
an application under R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of
conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division (c)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division
(d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law
and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is also a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender’s license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender
for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement purpose, or for a purpose
defined in R.C. § 5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law
enforcement officer involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier
enforcement unit who made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender’s
status as a licensee, a violation of division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section
is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender’s license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun shall not be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or
(e)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (b) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Agriculture." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      (2)   "Commercial motor vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4506.25(A).
      (3)   "Motor carrier enforcement unit." The Motor Carrier Enforcement
Unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that
is created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      (4)   "Motor vehicle," "street" and "highway." Have the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (5)   "Occupied structure." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      (6)   "Tenant." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (7)   "Unloaded." Any of the following:
         A.   No ammunition is in the firearm in question, and no ammunition is
loaded into a magazine or speed loader that may be used with the firearm in
question and that is located anywhere within the vehicle in question, without
regard to where ammunition otherwise is located within the vehicle in question.
For the purposes of division A. of this definition, ammunition held in
stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered ammunition that is loaded
into a magazine or speed loader.
         B.   With respect to a firearm employing a percussion cap, flintlock
or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the
priming charge is removed from the pan.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 678.05  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified in division
(b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued to qualified
applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarry workers, mine operators and other
persons regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business,
with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried
or used in the course of the business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit.  The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality.  The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if he or she is a natural person, or the name, address and principal
place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Any other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list the restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance.  A license shall be issued for the
regular use of a consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify
an expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify the expiration date,
not earlier than one year from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable
in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the
license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state.  Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use the dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
state.  The holder of a temporary permit may use the dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(4) and (A)(5) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.  The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 678.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 678.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or § 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, § 2923.15 or § 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other
than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass
knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade
knife, gravity knife or similar weapon;
      (4)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing him or her to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the
county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (5)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons.  A violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of division (a)(3)
or (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A violation
of division (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 678.08  SALE OF WEAPONS TO MINORS.
   (a)   No person shall sell a BB gun, air gun, slingshot, bow, crossbow or
any similar device capable of ejecting, discharging or otherwise throwing or
shooting any missile, pellet, BB, stone, bolt, metal or other substance capable
of causing injury to anyone, to a person under the age of 16.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a second offense.
(Ord. 23A-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 678.085  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the National Guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult.  Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
§ 678.09  POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section,
no person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or
other firearm, or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits
of the municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided the
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   This section does not extend to the discharge of any firearm while
upon that portion of the grounds of the Shelby Wastewater Treatment Plant that
has been designated as the firing range of the Shelby Police Department by any
individual authorized by the Shelby Police Department for the purposes of
training.
   (f)   This section does not extend to the discharge of any firearm(s) by any
person(s) in the presence and under the supervision of official and/or
employees from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and/or the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources (Division of Wildlife) while on the property of Copperweld
Shelby Division Plant 2 for the purpose of the destruction of gulls on the
property.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 28-2002, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 26-2005, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 678.095  DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the property of another or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person's own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person's
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section  shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
§ 678.10  FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions.  Unless otherwise provided, for the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "1.3G fireworks."  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation "Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   "1.4G fireworks."  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation "Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   "Beer" and "intoxicating liquor."  Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4301.01.
      (4)   "Booby trap."  A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   "Cigarette load."  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   "Controlled substance."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (7)   "Discharge site." An area immediately surrounding the mortars used
to fire aerial shells.
      (8)   "Explosive."  Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  "Explosive" includes
all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3 or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite,
black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric
blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses,
instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  "Explosives" does not
include "fireworks" as defined below, or any substance or material otherwise
meeting the definition of "explosive" set forth in this section that is
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity
described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to
the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
      (9)   "Fireworks."  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
      (10)   "Fireworks incident."  Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this section or R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (11)   "Fireworks incident site."  A discharge site or other location at
a fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (12)   "Fireworks plant."  All buildings and other structures in which
the manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured
fireworks by a manufacturer, takes place.
      (13)   "Highway."  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other
public thoroughfare.
      (14)   "Licensed building."  A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (15)   "Licensed exhibitor of fireworks" or "licensed exhibitor."  A
person licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (16)   "Licensed manufacturer of fireworks" or "licensed manufacturer." 
A person licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (17)   "Licensed premises."  The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (18)   "Licensed wholesaler of fireworks" or "licensed wholesaler."  A
person licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (19)   "Manufacturing of fireworks."  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (20)   "Novelties" and "trick noisemakers."
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      (21)   "Party popper."  A small plastic or paper item that contains not
more than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is
ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (22)   "Processing of fireworks."  The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (23)   "Railroad."  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (24)   "Retail sale" or "sell at retail."  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (25)   "Smoke device."  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (26)   "Snake" or "glow worm."  A device that consists of a pressed
pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon
burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (27)   "Snapper."  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (28)   "Storage location." A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or § 3743.17
(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail showroom,
and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks
may use only for the distribution, possession and storage of fireworks in
accordance with this chapter.
      (29)   "Trick match."  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a
small report or a shower of sparks.
      (30)   "Wholesale sale" or "sell at wholesale."  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (31)   "Wire sparkler."  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.05 or the requirements of R.C. § 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. §
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except as
smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
(R.C. § 3743.60(E)-(J))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.18 or
the requirements of R.C. § 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. § 3743.20, or
to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks plant
or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.61(E)-(J))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who resides in another state and purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the
person complies with R.C. § 3743.44, provided that knowingly making a false
statement on the fireworks purchasers form is not a violation of this section
but is a violation of R.C. § 2921.13 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   No person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks
in this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than
from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting the
fireworks, to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after
the time of their purchase.  No such person shall give or sell to any other
person in this state fireworks that the person has acquired in this state.
      (3)   No person who resides in this state and purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the person
complies with R.C. § 3743.45, provided that knowingly making a false statement
on the fireworks purchasers form is not a violation of this section but is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.13 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (4)   No person who resides in this state and who purchases fireworks in
this state under R.C. § 3743.45 shall obtain possession of the fireworks in
this state other than from a licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler, or
fail, when transporting the fireworks, to transport them directly out of this
state within 48 hours after the time of their purchase.  No such person shall
give or sell to any other person in this state fireworks that the person has
acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal
or, if available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. 
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with  the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to person or
property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance coverage
of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury, death or loss of
persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition.  The Council may
require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance
coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division.  The Fire
Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal.  A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, an out-of-
state resident as authorized by R.C. § 3743.44, a resident of this state as
authorized by R.C. § 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, or as authorized by any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of these statutes,
and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks authorized
to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no person shall discharge,
ignite or explode any fireworks in this municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   No person, other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler,
licensed exhibitor or shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in
this municipality.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A)-(E))
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, "fireworks" includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks.  No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, § 3743.16 or § 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, § 3743.16 or § 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions.  This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the Armed Forces of the United States and the militia of
this state of pyrotechnic devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers;
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal.  Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender.  The Fire Marshal's office or certified fire safety inspector's
office shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified
in R.C. §§ 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or § 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of this section
or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to any other penalties that may
be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless
the third sentence of this division applies, the person's license as an
exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
suspended, and the person is ineligible to apply for either type of license,
for a period of five years.  If the violation of division (e)(10) of this
section results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm to
property, the person's license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant
exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply
for a license as or to be licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D))
§ 678.11  ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Air gun." A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
      (2)   "Airport operational surface."  Any surface of land or water that
is developed, posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually
being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   "Firearm."  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (4)   "Spring-operated gun."  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface.  This division does not
apply to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.  In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A)-(E))
§ 678.12  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 678.13  THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES.
   (a)   No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, arrow, crossbow,
slingshot or other contrivance for ejecting, discharging or otherwise throwing
or shooting any missile, pellet, stone, bolt, metal or other substance capable
of causing injury to anyone, in or upon any street, park or other public
ground, or from or out of any yard, lot or building into any yard, lot, street,
alley, park or other public or private ground.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or render it
unlawful to possess, use or furnish for use, bows and arrows, in or upon any
public ground or park belonging to the city, for the purpose of participating
in or receiving or giving instruction and training in archery tournaments,
target practice, marksmanship and the proper handling, use and care of bows and
arrows, or in or upon any suitable range designated and laid out by the
Department of Recreation.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a second offense.
(Ord. 22A-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 678.14  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance and is acting within the scope of the officer's,
agent's or employee's duties, a security officer employed by a board of
education or governing body of a school during the time that the security
officer is on duty pursuant to that contract of employment, or any other person
who has written authorization from the board of education or governing body of
a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into a school safety
zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a school safety
zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in
accordance with that authorization;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
this division (b)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted.  This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, or a ROTC activity or another similar use of
the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person is carrying a valid license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun issued to the person under R.C. § 2923.125
or § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (10).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is carrying a valid license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun issued to the person under R.C. § 2923.125
or § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
         (b)   The person is the driver or passenger in a motor vehicle and is
in the school safety zone while immediately in the process of picking up or
dropping off a child.
         (c)   The person is not in violation of R.C. § 2923.16.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the State Board of Education
prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall impose upon
the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary driver's
license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver's license that
then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) and  shall
deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type during the
period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this state, the
court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating
privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   As used in this section, "object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm" means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C)-(G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 678.15  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued and that has
been revoked or suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128 or a temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued and that has been revoked
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.1213.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A.   A license to carry a concealed handgun that is issued under
R.C. § 2923.125 on or after March 14, 2007, shall expire five years after the
date of issuance, and a license that is so issued prior to March 14, 2007,
shall expire four years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a license under R.C. § 2923.125 or §
2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if the licensee
also carries a valid license and valid identification when the licensee is in
actual possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any
change in the licensee's residence address to the Sheriff who issued the
license within 45 days after that change.
         B.   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun
in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee
has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed
handgun and that the licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun; the
licensee shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of
a law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly
fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep
the licensee's hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless
directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not
knowingly remove, attempt to remove, grasp or hold the loaded handgun or
knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the
licensee's hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E),
after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped
and before the officer leaves. Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an
occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the
motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.04 and
if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor
vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the
unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been issued
a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that
the licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun.
         C.   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the
licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the officer approaches,
the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been issued a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the licensee
currently is carrying a concealed handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly
disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer
given while the licensee is stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee's
hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the
licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise
by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove,
attempt to remove, grasp or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact
with the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee's hands or fingers, in
any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.12(B), after any law enforcement officer
begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
      (2)   A valid license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or § 2923.1213 does
not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun in any manner
prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B) or in any manner prohibited under R.C. §
2923.16. A valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into any of the following places:
         A.   A police station, Sheriff's office or State Highway Patrol
station, premises controlled by the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse or other
detention facility, an airport passenger terminal, or an institution that is
maintained, operated, managed and governed pursuant to R.C. § 5119.02(A) or §
5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee's carrying the concealed
handgun is  in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located, in violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303, if the licensee's carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   A child day-care center, a type A family day-care home, a type B
family day-care home, or a type C family day-care home, except that this
division does not prohibit a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care
home, a type B family day-care home, or a type C family day-care home from
carrying a concealed handgun at any time in any part of the home that is not
dedicated or used for day-care purposes, or from carrying a concealed handgun
in a part of the home that is dedicated or used for day-care purposes at any
time during which no children, other than children of that licensee, are in the
home;
         H.   An aircraft that is in, or intended for operation in, foreign air
transportation, interstate air transportation, intrastate air transportation or
the transportation of mail by aircraft;
         I.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(3) of this section, unless
the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a statute,
ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed handgun into
the building;
         J.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer's premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer's premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer's decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer. As used in this division, "private employer" includes a private
college, university or other institution of higher education.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, "political subdivision" has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2744.01.
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this section,
the owner or person in control of private land or premises, and a private
person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the state, the United
States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United States, may post
a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those premises prohibiting
persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or onto that land or
those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a person who
knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature is guilty of criminal
trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that
nature and the posted land or premises primarily was a parking lot or other
parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal trespass in violation of
R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for
trespass based on the violation.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant's guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   "Residential premises." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except "residential premises" does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   "Landlord," "tenant" and "rental agreement." Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a license to carry a concealed handgun that was
issued pursuant to the law of another state that is recognized by the Attorney
General pursuant to a reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. §
109.69 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state as a
person who was issued a license to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. §
2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who
carries a license issued under that section.
      (5)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a license to carry a concealed handgun
under R.C. § 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace
officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a license to carry a concealed
handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that
apply to a person who carries a license issued under that section. For purposes
of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired peace officer who
possesses a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)B. of this section and a valid firearms requalification
certification issued pursuant to division (b)(6)C. of this section shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency's policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person's service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person's retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer's duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word "RETIRED".
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer's
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)      For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   "Government facility of this state or a political subdivision of
this state." Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         B.   "Qualified retired peace officer." A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         C.   "Retired peace officer identification card." An identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.1212:
      (1)   The following persons, boards and entities, or designees, shall
post in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in
substantially the following form: "Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant
to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the
person's control, convey or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance onto these premises."
         A.   The Director of Public Safety or the person or board charged with
the erection, maintenance or repair of police stations, municipal jails and the
municipal courthouse and courtrooms in a conspicuous location at all police
stations, municipal jails and municipal courthouses and courtrooms;
         B.   The Sheriff or Sheriff's designee who has charge of the Sheriff's
office in a conspicuous location in that office;
         C.   The Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol or the
Superintendent's designee in a conspicuous location at all State Highway Patrol
stations;
         D.   Each Sheriff, Chief of Police or person in charge of every
county, multi-county, municipal, municipal-county, or multi-county/ municipal
jail or workhouse, community-based correctional facility, halfway house,
alternative residential facility, or other local or state correctional
institution or detention facility within the state, or that person's designee,
in a conspicuous location at that facility under that person's charge;
         E.   The board of trustees of a regional airport authority, chief
administrative officer of an airport facility, or other person in charge of an
airport facility in a conspicuous location at each airport facility under that
person's control;
         F.   The officer or officer's designee who has charge of a courthouse
or the building or structure in which a courtroom is located in a conspicuous
location in that building or structure;
         G.   The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation or the Superintendent's designee in a conspicuous location in all
premises controlled by that Bureau;
         H.   The owner, administrator or operator of a child day-care center,
a type A family day-care home, a type B family day-care home, or a type C
family day-care home;
         I.   The officer of this state or of a political subdivision of this
state, or the officer's designee, who has charge of a building that is a
government facility of this state or the political subdivision of this state,
as defined in R.C. § 2923.126, and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to R.C. § 2923.126(B)(3).
      (2)   The following boards, bodies and persons, or designees, shall post
in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in substantially
the following form: "Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant to R.C. §
2923.122, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the person's control,
convey or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance into a school
safety zone."
         A.   A board of education of a city, local, exempted village or joint
vocational school district or that board's designee in a conspicuous location
in each building and on each parcel of real property owned or controlled by the
board;
         B.   A governing body of a school for which the State Board of
Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 or that body's
designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real
property owned or controlled by the school;
         C.   The principal or chief administrative officer of a nonpublic
school in a conspicuous location on property owned or controlled by that
nonpublic school.
(R.C. § 2923.1212)  (Ord. 12-2018, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 678.16  DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer's serial number or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number or other
mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed or
obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
§ 678.17  CONCEALED HANDGUN POSSESSION ON CITY OWNED PROPERTY/BUILDINGS.
   A licensee under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 is hereby authorized to carry
a concealed handgun in all city owned buildings and/or property, except the
Shelby Justice Center, housing both the Municipal Court at 29 Mack Avenue, and
the Police Department, located at 31 Mack Avenue.
(Ord. 23-2018, passed 10-15-2018)
CHAPTER 698:  PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
   
698.01   Definitions
   
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
698.04   Organizational penalties
   
698.05   Multiple sentences
   
698.06   Reserved
   
698.07   Suspension of driver’s license
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and public service, see
Ch. 608
   Classification of offenses, see §
606.02
   Criminal law jurisdiction, see §
606.05
   Culpable mental states, see §
606.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Limitation on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see §
608.07
   Offenses defined, see §
606.03
   Organizational criminal liability, see §
606.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   Requirements for criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Rules of construction, see §
606.04
   Sentencing for sexual offenses; predators; registration, see §
666.99
Statutory reference:
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of "imprisoned", see R.C. § 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.31
   Procedure on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.29
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Venue, see R.C. § 2901.12
§ 698.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Dangerous offender." A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   (b)   "Repeat offender." A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a
"repeat offender" if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender's behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender's conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or §
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or § 2929.23 or division (b)(5) or (b)(6)
of this section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to
law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender
pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that
shall be one of the following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender's participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. § 
307.93, § 341.14, § 341.19, § 341.21, § 341.23, § 753.02, § 753.04, § 753.16, §
2301.56 or § 2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, also
is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described
in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the offender for
the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional
definite jail term of not more than six months. The additional jail term shall
not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code. The offender
shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and prior to the jail
term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to any other
mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.
      (6)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, § 2907.24, § 2907.241 or § 2907.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(6)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22, §
2907.23, § 2907.24, § 2907.241 or § 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(6)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(6)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, § 2907.24, §
2907.241 or § 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender's community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a Department of Probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that Department of Probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender.  The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   If an offender violates any condition of a community control
sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator one or more of the
following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   A term of up to 180 days in an alternative residential facility
or a term in an alternative residential facility not to exceed the longest jail
term available for the offense, whichever is shorter. The court may specify the
level of security in the alternative residential facility that is needed for
the offender;
         C.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term of up to 60 days in a community alternative sentencing center
or district community alternative sentencing center established and operated in
accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section,
with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the offender complete in
the center the entire term imposed.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)C. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, alternative
residential facility, community alternative sentencing center, district
community alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender
will serve the residential sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in
charge of the operation of the halfway house, alternative residential facility,
community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative
sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender to be
examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including but
not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The person
in charge of the operation of the halfway house, alternative residential
facility, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will serve
the residential sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house,
alternative residential facility, community alternative sentencing center,
district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who refuses to
be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including but
not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious disease to be tested
and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division.  Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender's privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender's motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator's license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. §  2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours. 
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f). If the court in its
discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this section include but are not limited to the
following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could
be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or
any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon the victim's economic loss.
The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if
the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic
Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court
requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the
victim in open court or to the Adult Probation Department that serves the
jurisdiction or the Clerk of the Court on behalf of the victim.
            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine
the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes
restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an
amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation
report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing
property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as
restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss suffered by the victim
as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court
decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on
restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor disputes the amount of
restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the
victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
the amount of restitution sought from the offender.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any
survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce evidence
of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the
offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the amount of the restitution
otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing
restitution payments.
            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may request that the
prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for
modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court
grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines
appropriate.
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and 
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county's General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division  (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation's General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(4), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor.  A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(4)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(4)B.2.  of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(4)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may
do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the Clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same manner and form as
a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2)  or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(4) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement but do not preclude
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (6)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (7)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03  IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), § 4510.14(B) or § 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
666.99 or §
698.02 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender's character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender's history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender's conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim's youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
(b)(1)C. of this section.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e) and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future crime.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral or written
statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney or the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim's right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04  ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$1,000.
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
that penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
§ 698.05  MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(E)
or § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the state, another
state or the United States.  Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this
section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be
served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony
served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, § 2921.34 or § 2923.131.  When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, § 4510.16, § 4510.21 or § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, §
2903.07, § 2903.08 or § 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04
involving the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that is served
in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of
imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one
or more felonies under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of
the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed
for a felony before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06  RESERVED.
§ 698.07  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code of ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of these
Codified Ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
      Chapter
         
806.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
838.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
840.   PUBLIC SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
         
848.   TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
         
850.   TAXICABS
         
852.   TRANSIENT DEALERS
         
854.   TRASH AND REFUSE HAULERS
         
856.   COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
CHAPTER 806:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
806.01   Definitions
   
806.02   Permit required
   
806.03   Issuance of permit; no fee required
   
806.04   Equipment maintenance and inspection of alarm systems
   
806.05   Liability of city
   
806.06   Exemptions
   
806.07   False alarms
 
   
806.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Director of Public Safety, see
Ch. 236
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 240
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Police Department, see
Ch. 238
   Theft alarms, see §
438.20
§ 806.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Alarm system." Any assembly of equipment and devices which signals,
so as to be seen or heard outside the protected building or space, the presence
of robbery, burglary, vandalism or unauthorized intrusion and includes an
interconnected "alarm system" as well as an automatic dialing device.
   (b)   "Appropriate authority." The Director of Public Safety of the city.
   (c)   "Automatic dialing device." A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and which is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit by voice, message or code signal an emergency message
indicating a need for emergency response.
   (d)   "Chargeable false alarm." An alarm message or signal intentionally or
recklessly initiated and transmitted, either automatically or manually, through
an alarm system to the city, eliciting response by police when robbery,
burglary, vandalism or unauthorized intrusion does not, in fact, exist. This
does not include an alarm signal caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, thunderstorms
or other catastrophic acts of God not reasonably subject to control by the
alarm manufacturer, installer or owner.
   (e)   "False alarm." An alarm signal or message initiated and transmitted,
either automatically or manually, through an alarm system, to the city,
eliciting response by police when robbery, burglary, vandalism or unauthorized
intrusion does not, in fact, exist.  This does not include an alarm signal
caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, thunderstorms or other catastrophic acts of
God not reasonably subject to control by the alarm manufacturer, installer or
owner.
   (f)   "Interconnected alarm system." An alarm system which, directly or
indirectly, automatically or manually, uses a telephone line or cable line to
transmit an alarm or message upon activation of the alarm system.
   (g)   "Local alarm system." An alarm system that, when activated, only
sounds a horn, bell, buzzer or other type of audible or visible alarm that is
designed to be audible or visible beyond the premises being served, but which
does not result in the transmission of a signal to any other location.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for
and receiving an alarm system permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Application for the permit shall be made with the Director of Public
Safety who shall prescribe the form for application as well as the time and
place for its submittal.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.03  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; NO FEE REQUIRED.
   Upon application of any person for use of an alarm system, the Director of
Public Safety may issue a permit for the same. There will be no charge for the
permit.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.04  EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
   (a)   All equipment used in installation shall meet the applicable standards
of Underwriters Laboratories of the United States, Factory Mutual or the
National Fire Protection Association or other recognized industry standard. The
owner or installer may be required to submit evidence of the reliability and
suitability of the equipment to be installed.
   (b)   The appropriate authority or a designated representative shall have
the authority, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to enter upon any
premises within the city to inspect only the installation and operation of an
interconnected alarm system, the purpose of which is to report an emergency to
the police. Failure to allow reasonable inspection of the alarm system may be
grounds for disconnection from an interconnected alarm system. If the premises
are a private dwelling, then the equipment, after three false alarms, will be
disconnected and will not be re-connected until an inspection and corrections
can be made.
   (c)   The appropriate authority may require that repairs or adjustments be
made whenever he or she has determined that they are necessary to assure proper
operation. Failure to make repairs or adjustments may be grounds for
disconnection of the alarm system.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.05  LIABILITY OF CITY.
   The installation of interconnected alarm systems in conjunction with this
chapter shall not constitute acceptance by the city of any liability to
maintain any equipment, to answer alarms or for anything in connection
therewith.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.06  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to home smoke detectors
not intended to be heard outside the dwelling unit, nor to local alarm systems
or audible alarms affixed to structures, automobiles, boats, boat trailers,
house trailers and recreation vehicles or other motor vehicles.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.07  FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall allow more than three chargeable false alarms to be
transmitted during the immediately preceding one-year period. An alarm will be
classified as false if the responding police personnel see no evidence of
robbery, burglary, vandalism, unauthorized intrusion or medical emergency. If
the person proves that the alarm was caused by an event not reasonably
foreseeable and which could not have been prevented by the proper adjustment or
presetting of the sensor threshold, the alarm will be designated a
nonchargeable false alarm.
   (b)   (1)   After three officially chargeable false alarms in any 12-month
period, the owner of the alarm system shall be charged $30 for each chargeable
false alarm, in addition to the penalty provided in §
806.99. The billing will be through the City Finance Department and the funds
will be put into the Police Equipment Fund.
      (2)   No person shall fail to disconnect his or her alarm system upon
order of the appropriate authority as set forth herein.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly allow his or her alarm system to be used by
any person to create a false alarm as defined in §
648.08. 
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 806.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
806.07(c) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(Ord. 29-84, passed 12-3-1984)
CHAPTER 838:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
838.01   Purpose and intent
   
838.02   Definitions
   
838.03   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   
838.04   License required
   
838.05   Application for license
   
838.06   Issuance of a license
   
838.07   Employee license application
   
838.08   Issuance of sexually oriented business employee license
   
838.09   Expiration and renewal of license
   
838.10   License suspension
   
838.11   License revocation
   
838.12   Appeal rights
   
838.13   Transfer of license
   
838.14   Additional regulations for escort agencies
   
838.15   Additional regulations for nude model studios
   
838.16   Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture
theaters
   
838.17   Additional regulations for adult motels
   
838.18   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or
videos
   
838.19   Display of sexually explicit material to minors
   
838.20   Enforcement
§ 838.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate in the specified manner adult
entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses in order to
promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of this
city and establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city and to establish
reasonable regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult
entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses within this city.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the
city, in enacting this chapter, to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny, or
authorize the denial of, access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of the city in enacting this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution or exhibition of obscene material.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this chapter:
      (1)   “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin- operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image- producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographic films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, juice bar restaurant,
bottle club or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, which regularly features:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
         B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   “Adult entertainment” means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   “Adult entertainment establishment” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual encounter
establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an “adult
entertainment establishment.”
      (6)   “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
         A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproduction which is characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photograph reproductions; or
         B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
         C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
      (7)   “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas are regularly shown to more than five individuals.
      (8)   A.   “Adult novelty store” means a commercial establishment that
for any form of consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, that are characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   “Adult novelty store” includes a commercial establishment as
defined in R.C. § 2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of
materials exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store. The existence of other principal business purposes
does not exempt an establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of
consideration, such materials that exhibit or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (10)   “Characterized by” means describing the essential character or
quality of an item.
      (11)   “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police of the city or his
designated agent.
      (12)   “Day(s)” means business days unless otherwise specified.
      (13)   “Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon” means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas” the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (14)   “Employee” means any individual on a full-time, part-time, or
contract basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an
employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an
individual exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
      (15)   “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
      (16)   “Escort agency” means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (17)   “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
         A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
         B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
         C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
         D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      (18)   “Historic district” means area, place, site building, structure,
object or work of art as designated by the city.
      (19)   “Hospital” means an institution classified as a hospital under
R.C. § 3701.07, in which are provided to inpatients, diagnostic, medical,
surgical, obstetrical, psychiatric or rehabilitation care for a continuous
period longer than 24 hours.
      (20)   “Immediate family” means a person's spouse residing in the
person's household, parents, siblings of the whole or of the half blood, and
children, including adopted children.
      (21)   “License” means a license to act or operate a sexually oriented
business, issued pursuant to this chapter.
      (22)   “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate has
been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the license application
as principally responsible for the operation of the sexually oriented business.
With respect to an employee license issued under this chapter, “licensee” means
an employee as defined by § 838.02(a)(14) above in whose name a license has
been issued authorizing employment at sexually oriented business.
      (23)   “Nude or seminude model studio.”
         A.   Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or
seminudity, is provided for money or any other form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons.
         B.   A modeling class or studio is not a “nude or seminude model
studio” and is not subject to this chapter if it is operated in any of the
following ways:
            1.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
            2.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
            3.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of
the structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at lease three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (24)   “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means:
         A.   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast; or
         B.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock,
anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
      (25)   “Operates” means to control or hold primary responsibility for the
operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business entity, as an
individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility.
“Operate” or “Cause to be operated” shall mean to cause to function or to put
or keep in operation.
      (26)   “Operator” means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise
overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or
not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
      (27)   “Patron” means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business, except for any of the following;
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee's or volunteer's
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (28)   “Person” means individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm,
association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of
whatever form or character.
      (29)   “Premises” means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (30)   “Public building” means any building owned, leased or held by the
United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school
district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the
United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
      (31)   “Public park” or “recreation area” means public land which has
been designated for park or recreation activities including, but not limited
to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space,
wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city.
      (32)   “Regularly features” or “regularly shown” means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (33)   “Religious institution” means any church, synagogue, mosque,
temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related
religious activities.
      (34)   “Residential district” means a single- family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple-family or mobile home zoning district.
      (35)   “School” means any public or private educational facility
including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate
schools and high schools.
      (36)   “Seminude” means a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers
no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as
well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
      (37)   “Sexual device” means any three- dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but
not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of
the human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      (38)   “Sexual device shop” means a commercial establishment that
regularly features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store,
medical clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or
healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial establishment
that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (39)   “Sexual encounter establishment.”
         A.   A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where either of
the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B   An establishment in which a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment”.
      (40)   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion
picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, sexual
device shop, sexual encounter center, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency and adult motel as defined by § 838.02 of this chapter, but does not
include a business solely by reason of its showing, selling, or renting
materials that may depict sex.
      (41)   “Specified anatomical areas” means human genitals, pubic region,
and buttocks and the human female breasts below the point immediately above the
top of the areola.
      (42)   “Specified criminal activity” means any of the following offenses:
         A.   Prostitution or promoting prostitution; soliciting; loitering to
engage in solicitation; sexual performance by a child; public lewdness;
indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or
penal code of any local jurisdiction, state, or country, for which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
         B.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent
such conviction from constituting a “specified criminal activity” as defined in
this section.
      (43)   “Specified sexual activities” means sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of these activities.
      (44)   “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means
the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the
floor area exists on January 1, 2011.
      (45)   “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business
shall mean any of the following:
         A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
         B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling
interest in the business whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
         C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.03  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of:
      (1)   A religious institution;
      (2)   A public or private school;
      (3)   A boundary of a residential or historic district as defined in this
chapter;
      (4)   A public park or recreation area;
      (5)   A public building or hospital; or
      (6)   The property line of a residence or a lot included within a
residential district as defined in this chapter.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within 500 feet of another sexually
oriented business. A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits
the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase
of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   (c)   For purposes of division (a) of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a religious institution, public or private
school, public building or hospital or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park, residential district, or residential lot.
   (d)   For purposes of division (b), the distance between any two sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
   (e)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on January 1, 2011,
that is in violation of division (a), (b) or (c) shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue unless
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of two years
or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more
sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   In connection with operating a sexually oriented business, with the
exception of an adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, or
sexual device shop, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this
chapter.
   (b)   A violation of division (a)(2) above shall be a ground for the
suspension of a sexually oriented business license as provided for in § 838.10
of this chapter.
   (c)   No person shall act as an employee on the premises of a sexually
oriented business with the exception of an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult novelty store, or sexual device shop, without having secured a sexually
oriented business employee license (“employee license”) pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.05  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   An original or renewal application for a sexually oriented business
license shall be submitted to the city on a form provided by the Director of
Public Service. The city's application may require and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.
   (b)   A filing fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application, as
follows:
      Operator License - $300
      Employee License - $50
   (c)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall identify
and be signed by the following persons:
      (1)   If the business entity is owned by an individual, that individual.
      (2)   If the business entity is owned by a corporation, each officer or
director of the corporation, any individual owning or controlling more than 50%
of the voting shares of the corporation, and any person with an ownership
interest in the corporation who will be principally responsible for the
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business.
      (3)   If the business entity is owned by a partnership (general or
limited), a joint venture, or any other type of organization where two or more
persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization, each partner
(other than limited partners); and any other person entitled to share in the
profits of the organization, whether or not such person is also obligated to
share in the liabilities of the organization, who will be principally
responsible for the operation of the proposed sexually oriented business.
   (d)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must designate
one or more individuals who are to be principally responsible for the operation
of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is granted. At least
one person so designated must be involved in the day-to-day operation of the
proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis.
   (e)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
completed according to the instructions on the application form, which shall
require the following:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         A.   An individual, state the legal name and any aliases of such
individual; or
         B.   A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and all
of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and provide
a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or
         C.   A joint venture, or any other type of organization where two or
more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization, state
the complete name of the organization and provide a copy of the legal document
establishing the organization, if any; or
         D.   A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and the
date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, and state the names and
capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate
agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, state the fictitious name to be
used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the registration of the
business name under applicable laws.
      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal
activity involved and the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such
conviction.
      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the applicant has been
a partner in a partnership or an officer, or 50% or greater owner of a
corporation licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation.
      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this
chapter or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
      (6)   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property (i.e., permanent parcel number),
street address, and telephone number(s), if any.
      (7)   State the business mailing address of each applicant and each
person signing the application.
      (8)   If the applicant is a natural person, permission to access and
utilize the applicant's photograph currently on file with the Ohio Bureau of
Motor Vehicles.
      (9)   If the applicant is a natural person, submit a Webcheck (i.e.
fingerprints and criminal record).
      (10)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify
the location of any tattoos on such person's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any
other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the
premises of the proposed sexually oriented business.
      (11)   State the driver's license number and/or state identification
number if the applicant is a natural person or if an applicant that is not a
natural person, the applicant's federally issued tax identification number.
      (12)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at
least 18 years old.
      (13)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police investigation
into the applicant's criminal background regarding crimes of a sexual nature so
that the city can determine whether the chapter's civil disabilities provisions
apply. Such provisions exist to combat the sex crimes connected with sexually
oriented establishments by temporarily prohibiting those recently convicted of
such crimes from employment with those establishments. In addition, the
required disclosures ensure continuing compliance with the chapter's licensing
and permitting requirements.
      (14)   The information gathered pursuant to the above provisions
constitute protected private information and are exempt from Ohio's Public
Records Act.
      (15)   A site diagram showing the configuration of the premises of the
sexually oriented business. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the adult business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.06  ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business
license, the Director of Public Service or a designee shall promptly request
that the Police Department review the information provided in the application
concerning the criminal background of the applicant(s) and that the Police
Department shall transmit the results of its investigation in writing to the
Director of Public Service or a designee within five days of the completion of
its investigation.
   (b)   Within five days of receipt of an application for a sexually oriented
business, the Director of Public Service or a designee shall notify the Fire
Chief and the Health Commissioner of such application. In making such
notification, the Director of Public Service or a designee shall request that
the Fire Chief and Health Commissioner promptly inspect the premises for which
the sexually oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with the
regulations under their respective jurisdictions.
   (c)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Director of Public Service or a
designee a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with
Shelby Fire Regulations within ten days of receipt of notice of the
application.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall commence the
inspection of the premises for which a sexually oriented business license is
sought promptly upon receipt of the application, and shall complete, within ten
days after receipt of the application, a written certification of whether the
premises are in compliance with the city Zoning Ordinance, the city Exterior
Property Maintenance Code, and the provisions of this chapter related to
physical characteristics of the premises, and whether the city has received
notice from any state or county agency of the premises being in violation of
any applicable state building or property codes.
   (e)   Within 21 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
license application, the Director of Public Service or a designee shall approve
or deny the issuance of a license. The Director of Public Service or a designee
shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless he or she
determines that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant who is a natural person is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
insufficient on their face; provided, however, that no license shall be denied
solely on the ground that an applicant has refused to disclose his or her
Social Security number in accordance with the provisions of the Privacy Act of
1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, § 7(a)(1).
      (3)   An applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been denied a
sexually oriented business license by any jurisdiction or has had a license to
operate a sexually oriented business revoked by any jurisdiction.
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter.
      (5)   The proposed sexually oriented business would violate or fail to be
in compliance with any provisions of this chapter, the city Zoning Ordinance,
the city Exterior Property Maintenance Code, or state statute or regulation.
      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant is in violation of or not in compliance with any
provision of this section except as provided in division (f) of this section.
   (f)   A sexually oriented business license shall state on its face the name
of the applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the licensed sexually
oriented business. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be
easily read at any time.
   (g)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall advise the
applicant in writing within three days of the Director of Public Service's or a
designee's decision of the reasons for any license denial. If the city finds,
subsequent to denial, that the basis for the denial of the license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may reapply.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.07  EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application for an employee license shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Service or a designee on a form provided by the Director of
Public Service or a designee. The application may request, and the applicant
shall provide, such information as reasonably necessary (including
fingerprints) to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this chapter.
   (b)   An application for an employee license shall be completed according to
the instructions of the application form, which shall require the following:
      (1)   State the applicant's name and any other names (including “stage”
names) or aliases used by the applicant.
      (2)   State the applicant's date and place of birth.
      (3)   State the applicant's height, weight, and hair and eye color.
      (4)   Permission to access and utilize the applicant's photograph
currently on file with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
      (5)   Submit a Webcheck (i.e. fingerprints and criminal record) of the
applicant.
      (6)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that
normally would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed
sexually oriented business.
      (7)   State the applicant's present residence address and telephone
number.
      (8)   State the applicant's present or intended business address and
telephone number.
      (9)   State the applicant's driver's license number and/or state
identification number.
      (10)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years old.
      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented business-
related license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented
business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the applicant has ever
had a sexually oriented business-related license, permit, or authorization to
do business denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension.
      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction.
      (13)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police investigation
into the applicant's criminal background regarding crimes of a sexual nature so
that the city can determine whether the chapter's civil disabilities provisions
apply. Such provisions exist to combat the sex crimes connected with sexually
oriented establishments by temporarily prohibiting those recently convicted of
such crimes from employment with those establishments. In addition, the
required disclosures ensure continuing compliance with the chapter's licensing
and permitting requirements.
      (14)   The information gathered pursuant to the above provisions
constitutes protected private information and is exempt from Ohio's Public
Records Act.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.08  ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (a)   Upon the filing of a completed application for an employee license,
the Director of Public Service or a designee shall issue a license to said
applicant immediately.
   (b)   Within five days of receipt of a completed application for an employee
license, the Director of Public Service or a designee shall request that the
Police Department initiate an investigation of the information provided in the
application concerning the criminal background of the applicant. The Police
Department shall document the results of its investigation in writing within
five days of the completion of its investigation and transmit this writing to
the Director of Public Service or a designee.
   (c)   Within ten days after completion of the criminal background
investigation of the applicant, the Director of Public Service or a designee
shall either affirm the prior issuance of the license or revoke the license.
The Director of Public Service or a designee shall affirm the prior issuance of
a license to an applicant unless he or she determines that one or more of the
following findings are true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
insufficient on their face; provided, however, that no license shall be denied
solely on the ground that an applicant has refused to disclose his or her
Social Security number in accordance with the provisions of the Privacy Act of
1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, § 7(a)(1).
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
as defined in this chapter.
      (4)   The employee license is to be used for employment in a business
prohibited by local, state, or federal law, statute, rule or regulation.
      (5)   The applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been denied an
employee license by any jurisdiction or has had an employee license revoked by
any jurisdiction.
   (d)   If the employee license is revoked, the Director of Public Service or
a designee shall advise the applicant in writing within three days of the
reason(s) for any such revocation.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.09  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as provided
in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than 90 days and
no less than 21 days before the expiration date. If application is made less
than 21 days before the expiration date, the license will not be extended
pending a decision on the application, but will expire on its normal expiration
date.
   (b)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Service or a designee on a form
provided by the Director of Public Service. The completed renewal application
shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information
provided in the applicant's initial license application pursuant to this
chapter. Copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the
initial license application shall accompany the completed renewal application
that has been revised or such application shall be revised to reflect any
change in circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an
initial sexually oriented business license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in
writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
   (c)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall make determinations
concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and time
mandates used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this chapter.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall advise the
applicant in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any denial of a
license renewal.
   (e)   An application for renewal of an employee license shall be submitted
to the Director of Public Service or a designee on a form provided by the
Director of Public Service. The completed renewal application shall describe
any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information provided in the
applicant's initial license application pursuant to this chapter. Copies of any
document or material submitted in connection with the initial license
application shall accompany the completed renewal application that has been
revised or requires revision to reflect any change in circumstances or
conditions.
   (f)   When the city denies an application for renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from the date of
denial. However, if the city finds, subsequent to denial, that the basis for
the denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may reapply prior to the expiration of the one-year period.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.10  LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee:
      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter; or
      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to comply with
any section of this chapter.
   (b)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or its employee
or agent has refused to allow, or has prohibited or has interfered with, an
inspection of the licensed sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this chapter or any other reasonable inspection.
   (c)   The city shall suspend an employee license for a period not to exceed
30 days if it determines that a licensee has violated or is not in compliance
with any section of this chapter.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall advise the licensee
in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any suspension.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.11  LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (a)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license or employee
license if a cause of suspension under this chapter occurs and the license has
been suspended two times within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if it
determines that:
      (1)   A licensee failed to provide all information and documents required
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or provided
information or documents as requested on the application that are false;
      (2)   The licensee(s) failed to comply with any requirement stated in the
license, pursuant to this chapter, to correct specified deficiencies within 120
days;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution, solicitation, or the
commission of a felony on the premises;
      (5)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (6)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of specified sexual
activity, as defined in this chapter, to occur in or on the licensed premises;
      (7)   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as
defined in this chapter, during the term of the license; or
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the township, county, or
state for any taxes or fees that were assessed or imposed in relation to any
business.
   (c)   The city shall revoke an employee license if it determines that:
      (1)   The licensee failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
false;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of
a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended; or
      (3)   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in this chapter during the term of the license.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service or a designee shall advise the licensee
in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any revocation.
   (e)   When the city revokes a license pursuant to § 838.11(a), (b)(3)
through (7), (c)(2) or (c)(3) above, the licensee shall not be issued another
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
   (f)   When the city revokes a license pursuant to § 838.11(b)(1), (b)(8) or
(c)(1) above, the applicant may be granted a license if the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated and at least 30 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.12  APPEAL RIGHTS.
   (a)   Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter
may be appealed to the Planning Commission by written notice within ten days of
such denial, suspension, or revocation. Unless the applicant requests a longer
period, the Planning Commission must hold a hearing on the appeal within 21
days and must issue a decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension,
or revocation within five days after the hearing. During the time between the
date of the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license and the date of the
Planning Commission's decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension,
or revocation, the status quo of the license holder or applicant shall be
maintained.
   (b)   In the event that the Planning Commission affirms the denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant may pursue an appeal to
the Richland County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2506. The
failure of the City Planning Commission to render a decision on the application
within the time prescribed in § 838.12(a) above shall be considered an
affirmance of the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license and the
applicant may pursue an appeal to the Richland County Court of Common Pleas
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2506.
   (c)   Any licensee lawfully operating a sexually oriented business prior to
the denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or revocation of
a license, shall retain said license and all privileges attendant thereto,
subject to all other terms of this chapter, so that the status quo of the
licensee is maintained during the pendency of an appeal to the Planning
Commission of a decision rendered under this chapter and during the entire time
required for the court to rule on the appeal pursuant to § 838.12(b).
   (d)   Any licensee lawfully acting as an employee in a sexually oriented
business prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or the
suspension or revocation of a license, shall retain said license and all
privileges attendant thereto, subject to all other terms of this chapter, so
that the status quo of the licensee is maintained during the pendency of an
appeal to the Planning Commission of a decision rendered under this chapter and
during the entire time required for the court to rule on the appeal pursuant to
§ 838.12(b) above.
   (e)   In the event that any judicial review of the denial of a new or
renewal license application or the revocation or suspension of a license is
still pending 30 days before the expiration date of any license, the licensee
may file a renewal license application with the Director of Public Service or a
designee pursuant to this chapter. In the event that an application for renewal
of a license is denied and the applicant seeks judicial review of that denial,
the city has the right to consolidate such review with any pending judicial
actions in regards to the previous denial, suspension or revocation of a
license.
   (f)   If, during the pendency of any appeal pursued under § 838.12(b), there
are additional denials of a renewal license application or suspensions or
revocations of that license, the city has the right to consolidate the appeal
pursued under § 838.12(b) above for the additional denials, suspensions or
revocations with any pending appeal for that same licensee.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.13  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from one
licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of
a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and immediately revoke
that license.
   (b)   An employee license is not transferable from one licensee to another,
but the use of the license by the individual to whom it was issued may be
transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business to another such
licensed establishment during the term of the license, provided that the
licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the Director of Public
Service or a designee within 15 days of such transfer.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.14  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any persons under the age of 18
years.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.15  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (a)   Any nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (b)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she
appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It
is a defense to prosecution under this division if the person under 18 years
was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity
or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (d)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises; except that a sofa may be placed in reception room
open to the public.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.16  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT MOTION PICTURE
THEATERS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises
of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
   (b)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she
knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult
theater or adult motion picture theater.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (a) and (b) of this
section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view
or persons of the opposite sex.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.17  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a
sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a sleeping room
to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or she
rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or
“subrent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.18  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS.
   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   A diagram of the premises shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches.
      (2)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without prior submission of the proposed diagram to the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (4)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in
this division must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that
the view area specified in division (a)(4) of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times
that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      (6)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the
floor level.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that
the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
   (b)   A person having a duty under divisions (a)(1) through (a)(7) above
commits an offense if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.19  DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to
persons under the age of 18 years, he or she displays a book, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a
manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to
exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts;
      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks
or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or
      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (b)   In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner
that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business
establishment:
      (1)   It is available to the general public for handling and inspection;
or
      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 838.20  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Except as provided by division (b) or (c) of this section, any person
violating this chapter is guilty of a first degree misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any person who violates §
838.04(a)(1) shall be guilty of a third degree misdemeanor for a first offense,
and a first degree misdemeanor for a second offense.
   (c)   A person who violates §
838.04(c) above shall be guilty of a third degree misdemeanor for a first
offense and a first degree misdemeanor for a second offense.
(Ord. 26-2010, passed 10-18-2010)
CHAPTER 840:  PUBLIC SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
Section
   
840.01   License required; fee; exceptions
 
   
840.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animal fights, see §
618.16
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles, see §
666.12
   Gambling, see
Ch. 630
   Safety of crowds at live entertainment, see §
636.17
Statutory reference:
   Contests or games at county fairs, see R.C. §§ 1711.09, 1711.11
   County license for public shows, see R.C. Ch. 3765
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.48, 715.63, 3765.02
   State licensing of portable amusement devices, see R.C. § 1711.11(H)
§ 840.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall stage, put on or perform any public show or exhibition for
admission to which money or other reward is in any manner demanded or received,
unless he or she has first obtained a license therefor from the Mayor. The fee
for the license shall be $25 for each and every day or night that the
exhibition or public show is staged, put on or performed. However, this section
shall not apply to or include lectures on historical, literary and scientific
subjects; exhibitions, concerts and entertainments given by and for the benefit
of any church or benevolent institution, or by the public schools of the city;
any exhibition, theatrical performance, concert or entertainment given in any
church or in any theater of the city; or any concert or entertainment given or
rendered by any resident of the city.
§ 840.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(1986 Code, § 725.99)
CHAPTER 848:  TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
848.01   Definitions
   
848.02   License required; fees
   
848.03   General requirements
   
848.04   Inspections
   
848.05   Patrons under the influence; minors
   
848.06   Waste disposal
 
   
848.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Division of Health, see
Ch. 276
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, see
Ch. 1060
   Health Commissioner, see §
276.02
   Intoxication, see §
648.04
Statutory reference:
   Hazardous and solid wastes, see R.C. Ch. 3734
§ 848.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Certificate of inspection." Written approval from the Health
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative that a tattooing
establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this chapter.
   (b)   "Health Commissioner." The City Health Commissioner or his or her
authorized representative.
   (c)   "Operator." Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association
that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed, and any
individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the person of
another.
   (d)   "Tattoo," "tattooed" or "tattooing." Refers to any method of placing
designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under
the skin, with ink or any other substance, resulting in the coloration of the
skin, by the aid of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or
puncture the skin. 
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of operating a tattoo
establishment in the city without first obtaining a license to engage in such
business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $25, provided, however, that no application fee shall be received for
renewal of an existing license. Any change of ownership shall require a new 
application and license, with payment of fees therefor.
   (c)   The license fee for engaging in the business of operating a tattoo
establishment within the city shall be $50 per year.
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Each person who operates a tattooing establishment shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   The room in which tattooing is done shall have an area of not less
than 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an impervious,
smooth and washable surface.
      (2)   A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be
accessible at all times that the tattooing establishment is open for business.
The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and
sanitary towels.
      (3)   All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily
cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color with a smooth
washable finish and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a
panel at least six feet high or by a door.
      (4)   The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
      (5)   The operator shall wash his or her hands thoroughly with soap and
water before starting to tattoo; the hands shall be dried with individual,
single-use towels.
      (6)   No tattooing shall be done on any skin surface that has a rash,
pimples, boils, infections or manifests any evidence of an unhealthy condition.
      (7)   No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals
for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish, birthmark,
scar or tattoo.
      (8)   Safety razors with a new, single-service blade for each customer or
patron, or a straight-edge razor, may be used and shall be thoroughly cleaned
and sterilized before each use on each customer or patron.
      (9)   The area to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed for a
period of two minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic
liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the area. After
shaving and before tattooing is begun, a solution of iodine or betadine shall
be applied to the area with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile
instrument.
      (10)   Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its
equivalent as approved by the Health Commissioner, shall be used on the area to
be tattooed, and it shall be applied with sterile gauze.
      (11)   The use of styptic pencils, alum block or other solid styptics to
check the flow of blood is prohibited.
      (12)   An inquiry shall be made, and anyone giving a history of recent
jaundice or hepatitis shall not be tattooed.
      (13)   Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be
used for each patron, and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately
after completing work on a patron, and any dye in which the needles were dipped
shall not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from
the skin with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which
shall be used only on one person and then immediately discarded. After
completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed with sterile
gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by the Health
Commissioner, or a 70% alcohol solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to
dry and petroleum jelly from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied,
using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the
tattooed area with adhesive.
   (b)   All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a
closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet when not in use. Such cabinet
shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
      (1)   A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing
all needles and similar instruments before use on any person. (Alternative
sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approved by the
Health Commissioner.) Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by
exposure to live steam for at least 30 minutes at a minimum pressure of 15
pounds per square inch at a temperature of 240ºF or 116ºC.
      (2)   The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so
used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing that they will not be
contaminated.
   (c)   Permanent records of each patron or customer shall be maintained by
the licensee or operator of the establishment. Before the tattooing operation
begins, the patron or customer shall be required personally to enter, on a
record form provided for such establishments, the date and his or her name,
address, age, serial number (if a member of the Armed Forces) and signature. 
Such records shall be maintained in the tattoo establishment and shall be
available for examination by the Health Commissioner. Records shall be retained
by the operator or licensee for a period of not less than two years. In the
event of a change of ownership or closing of the business, all such records
shall be made available to the Health Commissioner.
   (d)   No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other
disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed. All
infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become known to the
operator shall promptly be reported to the Health Commissioner by the person
owning or operating the tattooing establishment, and the infected client shall
be referred to a physician.
   (e)   All pigments, dyes or colors used in tattooing shall be sterile and
free from bacteria, virus particles and noxious agents and substances, and the
pigments, dyes and colors used from stock solutions for each customer or patron
shall be placed in a single-service receptacle and the receptacle and remaining
solution shall be discarded after use on each customer or patron.
   (f)   All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the
tattooing of a person shall be sterile.
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.04  INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   An applicant for a license to operate a tattooing establishment shall
first obtain a certificate of inspection from the Health Commissioner,
indicating that the establishment has been inspected and is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The Health Commissioner may conduct periodic inspections of any
tattooing establishment for the purpose of determining whether or not the
establishment and the persons performing the art of tattooing therein are in
compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this chapter
and other pertinent ordinances. No operator of a tattooing establishment or
other person shall willfully prevent or restrain the Health Commissioner from
entering any licensed establishment where tattooing is being performed for the
purpose of inspecting the premises, after proper identification is presented to
the operator. After completion of inspection, the health inspector may revoke
the license for noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.05  PATRONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE; MINORS.
   No person shall tattoo any individual who is under the influence of alcohol
and/or drugs or any minor.
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.06  WASTE DISPOSAL.
   All waste to be disposed of as a result of tattooing shall be considered
medical waste and shall be subject to any and all state regulations governing
disposal of the same. 
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
§ 848.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 14-92, passed 7-6-1992)
CHAPTER 850:  TAXICABS
Section
   
850.01   Definitions
   
850.02   Certificate of necessity and license to operate required
   
850.03   Application for certificate of necessity
   
850.04   Public hearing on application for certificate
   
850.05   Issuance of certificate
   
850.06   Application for license to operate
   
850.07   Rules and regulations
   
850.08   Liability insurance
   
850.09   Issuance of license to operate; effective period
   
850.10   Operator's license fee
   
850.11   Suspension or revocation of certificates and licenses
   
850.12   Requirements for drivers
   
850.13   Rates of fare
   
850.14   Employment of unlicensed drivers prohibited
   
850.15   Appeals from decisions to revoke certificates or licenses
   
850.16   Appellate procedure
 
   
850.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see §
452.11
   Motor vehicle equipment, see
Ch. 438
   Operation of motor vehicles generally, see Chs.
432,
434
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeur's license not required, see R.C. § 4501.01(X), (Y)
   Operation by minor prohibited, see R.C. § 4507.321
   Power to establish stands and fix rates, see R.C. § 715.25
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.22, 715.66
§ 850.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Director." The Director of Public Safety of the city.
   (b)   "Driver." Every person actually in charge of the operation as the
chauffeur of a public vehicle, whether as owner, agent, servant or employee of
the owner.
   (c)   "Owner." Any person who has control or direction of operation or
maintenance of a public vehicle, or who receives the benefit of the collection
of revenue derived from the operation of a public vehicle on or over the
streets of the city, whether as owner, licensee, bailee or otherwise, except a
driver.
   (d)   "Public vehicle." Every vehicle for the common carriage and conveyance
of passengers for hire, except motor buses and motor vehicles used solely for
funerals, weddings and christenings.
   (e)   "Taxicab." Every public vehicle equipped with or without a taximeter,
used for the transportation for hire of not more than five passengers at any
one time, for which public patronage is solicited in whole or in part upon the
streets or in quasi-public places.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.02  CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY AND LICENSE TO OPERATE REQUIRED.
   No owner shall operate a public vehicle within or from the city unless he or
she is the holder of a certificate of necessity and a license to operate issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.03  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY.
   (a)   Any person desiring a certificate of necessity shall file with the
Director of Public Safety a written application therefor, on a form to be
provided by the city.  The application shall be in affidavit form and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The full name, age and residence of the applicant, and, if the
applicant is a partnership, the full name, age and residence of each of the
partners, and, if the applicant is a corporation, the full name of the
corporation, together with the full name of its principal officers;
      (2)   The name under which the applicant will do business;
      (3)   The type of vehicle which is proposed to be used in the service,
with information as to the age, carrying capacity and motor power of the same
and the color scheme and local symbols to be used, together with all other
lettering or marks proposed to be used by the applicant on the vehicle;
      (4)   The number of vehicles proposed to be used, the rate of fare to be
charged and the method of charging the same;
      (5)   A statement that the applicant is capable of and will carry
liability insurance as hereinafter provided for;
      (6)   Information as to the applicant's financial responsibility or
fitness, as may be required by the Director or Council;
      (7)   A schedule of rates of fare to be charged for service within the
city; and
      (8)   Such other information as the Director or Council may require.
   (b)   The application shall be filed with a fee of $10 to cover the cost of
investigating the application, serving notice of a public hearing and granting
or refusing to grant the certificate.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.04  PUBLIC HEARING ON APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   The Director of Public Safety shall report the application for a certificate
of necessity to Council. Council shall thereupon set a date for a public
hearing upon the application and shall cause a notice of the public hearing to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one
week prior to the date of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the Director to
investigate the statements contained in the application and to report his or
her findings and recommendations to Council before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.05  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   If Council determines that the public convenience and necessity require the
granting of a certificate and that the same will be in the best interests of
the city and its residents, it may approve the application and order the
Director of Public Safety to issue a certificate of necessity to the applicant.
In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the
granting of such a certificate, Council shall consider such relevant facts as
it may deem necessary to the common good and welfare of the city and the
health, safety and convenience of its people, and shall consider the character
and financial responsibility of the applicant, the amount of taxicab service
already available to the city from other operators and such other facts and
circumstances as, in the judgment of Council, are pertinent to such matters.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO OPERATE.
   (a)   The holder of a certificate of necessity issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may apply to the Director of Public Safety for a
license to operate any public vehicle that comes within the scope of the
certificate. The application shall be in writing and shall state the full name
and address of the owner of the public vehicle and also of the applicant; the
trade name under which the applicant does or will do business; the type of
vehicle for which the license is desired; the length of time the vehicle has
been in use; the number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying; the
motor power, design and color scheme of the vehicle; and the local symbol used
or proposed to be used, together with all other lettering or marks used or
proposed to be used by the applicant on the vehicle. The granting of a license
to operate shall be conditioned upon the maintenance by the applicant of speed
governors, set at a maximum of 45 miles per hour, on a majority of the vehicles
covered by the applicant and being operated by the applicant under prior
licenses.
   (b)   The Director may require additional information as to the financial
responsibility and fitness of management, of officers and of stockholders of
the applicant, and such other information as he or she may desire. The
application, together with any statements of further information required by
the Director, shall have affixed thereto an affidavit duly sworn to by the
applicant.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.07  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to establish such
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs and automobiles
for hire, and their appurtenances, construction and condition of fitness, as he
or she deems best for the safety and adequate transportation of passengers and
the public in general.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.08  LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab or permit the
same to be operated until and unless the approved applicant for a license
deposits with the Director of Finance and Public Record a policy or certificate
of liability insurance for each unit for which a license is applied for,
acceptable to and approved by the Director of Law, indemnifying the applicant
in the sum of $500,000 for injury to one person, $1,000,000 for injury to more
than one person and $300,000 for property damage in any one accident, for the
operation of each taxicab for which the license is applied. The policy shall
contain a clause obligating the surety company or insurance company to give a
ten days' written notice to the Mayor before the lapse, expiration or
termination of the policy, and if the same is allowed to lapse, the license to
operate shall immediately expire.
§ 850.09  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE TO OPERATE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   If the Director of Public Safety finds that the applicant for a license to
operate is the owner of a valid certificate of necessity and that the vehicle
for which the license to operate is sought is within the class provided for in
the certificate and fit and safe for the transportation of passengers under
such rules and regulations as the Director may promulgate, he or she shall
issue to the owner a license to operate such a vehicle upon the deposit by the
owner of the insurance policy heretofore described and upon payment of the
license fee hereinafter set forth. There shall then be delivered to the owner a
license for the vehicle. Any license issued hereunder shall expire on December
31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.10  OPERATOR'S LICENSE FEE.
   Every licensee shall pay a fee of $25.00 per year in advance for each public
vehicle license. However, the fee for licensing after July 1 in any year shall
be $12.50 for the balance of that year or any fraction thereof.
§ 850.11  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES.
   (a)   Any certificate of necessity or license to operate may be suspended or
revoked at any time by the Director of Public Safety if:
      (1)   The Director finds the owner's past record to be unsatisfactory;
      (2)   The owner fails to operate his or her licensed taxicab in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of these
Codified Ordinances; or
      (3)   The owner ceases to operate his or her taxicab for a period of 30
consecutive days without the consent of the Director.
   (b)   Any person whose certificate of necessity or license to operate has
been revoked by the Director may appeal the decision of the Director to the
Board of Appeals provided for in §§
850.15 and
850.16.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.12  REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVERS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a public vehicle unless he or she has been
licensed to drive a motor vehicle by the state and is:
      (1)   At least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might
render him or her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
      (3)   Able to read, write and speak the English language; and
      (4)   Clean in dress and person, of good moral character and not addicted
to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service shall issue a driver's license to any
person complying with the above provisions and may renew the license from year
to year by endorsement thereon.
(1986 Code, § 729.12)
§ 850.13  RATES OF FARE.
   (a)   The owner, whether operating by a taximeter or by a zone plan, shall
file a schedule of his or her own rates of fare, as hereinbefore provided, and
no owner or driver shall charge a higher rate of fare than the one so filed
without first obtaining the approval of Council therefor.
   (b)   Nothing herein contained shall preclude the owner or driver from
making a special hourly rate with the passenger who expects to use the service
for more than an hour at a time.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.14  EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED DRIVERS PROHIBITED.
   No person operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire within or from the city
shall employ as a driver of the taxicab any person other than a driver duly
licensed or registered under the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 436.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.15  APPEALS FROM DECISIONS TO REVOKE CERTIFICATES OR LICENSES.
   An appeal from any decision of the Director of Public Safety revoking a
certificate of necessity or a license to operate may be made to a Board of
Appeals which is hereby established and which shall be composed of the Mayor,
the Director of Law and the Director of Finance and Public Record, which Board
is hereby authorized, after a full hearing, to affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Director.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.16  APPELLATE PROCEDURE.
   In order to avail himself or herself of the appeal referred to in §
850.15, the appellant shall, within ten days after receiving notice of
revocation, give written notice of the appeal to the Mayor. Such appeal shall
be heard by the Board of Appeals within ten days after the filing of the notice
of appeal and the Board shall make its decision not later than ten days after
the termination of the hearing. The decision of the Board shall be final.
(Ord. 34-47, passed 10-6-1947)
§ 850.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(1986 Code, § 729.99)
CHAPTER 852:  TRANSIENT DEALERS
Section
   
852.01   License required; application; fee; effective period; appeal
   
852.02   Exhibiting license; peace disturbances; misrepresentation
   
852.03   Excess noise; business hours
   
852.04   Exceptions
   
852.05   License renewal and revocation
 
   
852.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Disturbing the peace, see
Ch. 648
   Trespassing, see §§
642.10,
642.11
Statutory reference:
   Charitable solicitation, see R.C. Ch. 1716
   Home solicitation sales, see R.C. §§ 1345.21 et seq.
   Power to inspect food products, see R.C. § 715.46
   Power to regulate, see R.C. 715.64
   Sales of goods and services within right-of-way of interstate and other
state highways, see R.C. § 5515.07
§ 852.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD; APPEAL.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the selling of, offering to sell,
contracting to sell or taking orders to sell any goods, merchandise, products,
insurance, magazine or newspaper subscription, or any product or service
whatsoever, nor shall any person engage in soliciting donations or
contributions for any cause, person or organization on the public streets,
parks or grounds of the city, or by going from house to house within the city,
without first obtaining a license to do so from the Mayor as provided in this
chapter
   (b)   Application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the
Chief of Police. Upon receipt of the application and a fee of $10, the Chief of
Police shall make an investigation as to the applicant's moral character and
business background. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police
shall recommend to the Mayor whether or not the license should be issued. Such
recommendation shall be made within seven days of the date of the application.
The Mayor shall thereupon promptly issue the license or advise the applicant
that the license has been refused. The license shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance. 
   (c)   Any person aggrieved by the failure of the Mayor to grant a license
under this chapter may appeal in writing to the Council within ten days of the
refusal. Council shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting and may, on
the evidence presented, reverse or affirm the decision of the Mayor.
§ 852.02  EXHIBITING LICENSE; PEACE DISTURBANCES; MISREPRESENTATION.
   The licensee shall exhibit the license to any person on request. He or she
shall promptly leave any premises on the request of the occupant and shall not
engage in any breach of the peace. The licensee shall not make any false,
fraudulent or deceptive statements with respect to the product or service
offered for sale or with respect to the cause for which the solicitation is
being made.
(Ord. 8-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 852.03  EXCESS NOISE; BUSINESS HOURS.
   (a)   No licensee shall use any whistle, bell, horn or other mechanical
device for the purpose of advertising his or her goods, wares and merchandise
or services, or attracting customers, nor call his or her goods, wares, foods,
merchandise or services in a loud voice for such purposes.
   (b)   All peddling or soliciting done under authority of a license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays. No peddling or soliciting shall be
conducted on Sunday.
(Ord. 8-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 852.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   No license shall be required from the following persons:
   (a)   Persons who solicit only the purchase of or subscription to
newspapers.
   (b)   Persons who solicit only for wholesale delivery to merchants,
manufacturers or other businesspeople at their offices, places of business or
profession, businesses or manufacturing establishments.
   (c)   Persons who act as peddlers or solicitors at the invitation or request
of the person contacted.
   (d)   Persons who solicit or peddle on behalf of any religious, educational,
scouting, athletic, charitable, civic, service or governmental organization.
   (e)   Persons who solicit only the sale of products of their own raising or
manufacturing.
(Ord. 24-85, passed 10-21-1985)
§ 852.05  LICENSE RENEWAL AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   The Mayor may, at his or her option, renew a license previously issued
without fulfillment of some or all of the requirements set forth in §
852.01.
   (b)   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
at any time by the Mayor should the person to whom it is issued be guilty of
any fraud, misrepresentation or unlawful act in connection with his or her
business or otherwise, be found to be a person not fit to be engaged in that
business, or be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 8-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 852.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than $100.  For
each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both.  A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 8-83, passed 3-21-1983)
CHAPTER 854:  TRASH AND REFUSE HAULERS
Section
   
854.01   Permit required; fee; inspection of trucks
   
854.02   Deposit of trash or refuse
 
   
854.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Disposing of dead animals and animal waste, see §
618.20
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, see
Ch. 1060
   Littering, see §
660.03
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Refuse in yards, see §
1490.14
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of trash and refuse, see R.C. §§ 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers, see R.C. § 3707.39
§ 854.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; INSPECTION OF TRUCKS.
   (a)   No person shall, for hire, collect, remove or haul trash or refuse
over, through or upon any of the streets, alleys or other public ways of the
city, or engage in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting rubbish,
ashes, trash or refuse for hire, without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Director of Public Service. The permit shall be for a period of one year
and the fee shall be $100.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the Director or his or her
agents shall inspect all trucks, which shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
      (1)   All trucks shall be clean at all times, washed and kept in good
running condition.
      (2)   All trucks shall have tightly fitting beds.
      (3)   The sides of all trucks shall be tight to prevent paper from
blowing over the streets.
      (4)   All trucks shall be covered with tight coverings, which may be
tarpaulin, wood or metal.
§ 854.02  DEPOSIT OF TRASH OR REFUSE.
   Any person who receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall file with the Director of Public Service sufficient evidence that the
trash or refuse is being deposited, either directly or indirectly, in an
approved disposal site.
(Ord. 32-87, passed 11-24-1987)
§ 854.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. If the convicted person has previously been issued a
permit by the city, the permit shall be revoked and no new permit shall be
issued for a period of one year after the revocation. 
(Ord. 12-2000, passed 4-17-2000)
CHAPTER 856:  COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
Section
   
856.01   Designation
   
856.02   Mayoral appointments
   
856.03   Preparation of a plan
   
856.04   Meetings
§ 856.01  DESIGNATION.
   Community Improvement Corporation of Shelby, Ohio, Inc. (hereinafter
referred to as "CIC") is hereby designated as the community improvement
corporation for the city in accordance with R.C. § 1724.10.
(Ord. 3-2005, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 856.02  MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint to the governing board of CIC such
members as may be designated to represent the city on that board.
(Ord. 3-2005, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 856.03  PREPARATION OF A PLAN.
   CIC is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a plan in consultation with
the officials of the city for industrial, commercial, distribution and research
development for the city in accordance with the powers prescribed in R.C. §
1724.10(A), and to submit the plan to the Council for its consideration.
(Ord. 3-2005, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 856.04  MEETINGS.
   The governing board of CIC shall meet not less than quarterly.
(Ord. 3-2005, passed 2-22-2005)
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
      Chapter
         
880.   EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
         
881.   EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
         
882.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
         
884.   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
         
890.   COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS
CHAPTER 880:  EARNED INCOME TAX
REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Editor's note:
   An additional 0.5% income tax increase for the purpose of making permanent
improvements to the city infrastructure was approved by the voters on November
8, 2005.
   An additional 0.2% income tax increase, taxable by the city for a period of
five years, from January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018, for the purpose of
maintaining roadway and sidewalk improvement and repair, was approved by the
voters on November 5, 2013.
   Ordinance 50-2015, passed December 21, 2015, declared Chapter 880 applicable
to years 2015 and earlier, and adopted Chapter 881, containing earned income
tax regulations effective from and after January 1, 2016.
Section
   
880.01   Definitions
   
880.02   Commencement and duration of tax
   
880.03   Imposition of tax
   
880.04   Determination of allocation of tax
   
880.05   Rental income from real estate
   
880.06   Exemptions
   
880.07   Return and payment of tax
   
880.08   Collection of unpaid taxes; refund of overpayments
   
880.09   Interest and penalties
   
880.10   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
880.11   Other provisions
   
880.12   Finance Director
   
880.13   Board of Review
 
   
880.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Power to levy income tax, see Charter §
1
   Taxation for constructing improvements, see Charter §
106
Statutory reference:
   Municipal income taxes, see R.C. Ch. 718
   Payroll deductions, see R.C. § 9.42
   Power to levy income tax, see Ohio Const., Art. XVIII, § 13
§ 880.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to them herein. In all definitions contained in this chapter,
the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter with regard to the terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives herein.
   (a)   "Adjusted federal taxable income." A C corporation's federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute "adjusted federal
taxable income" as if the pass-through entity was a C corporation. This
definition does not apply to any taxpayer required to file a return under R.C.
§ 5745.03 or to the net profit from a sole proprietorship. This definition is
effective for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2004.
   (b)   "Association." Any partnerships, limited partnerships, limited
liability corporations and limited liability partnerships as defined in the
federal tax code, or any other form of unincorporated business or enterprise,
owned by one or more persons. The terms "association" and "unincorporated
business" are interchangeable terms.
   (c)   "Board of Review." The Board created by and constituted as provided
for in the income tax ordinance of the city.
   (d)   "Business." An enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, proprietorship, limited partnership, corporation,
association or any other entity; excluding, however, all nonprofit corporations
or associations which are exempt from the payment of federal income tax.
   (e)   "Corporation." A corporation, Subchapter S corporation, or joint stock
association organized under the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio or
any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
   (f)   "Dishonored check." Any check received in payment of taxes, penalty,
interest or service charges that is returned unpaid by the bank.
   (g)   "Domicile." The permanent legal residence of a individual taxpayer.
Actual residence is not necessarily the "domicile" of a taxpayer. A taxpayer
may have more than one residence but not more than one "domicile". In the event
of a business or association, the "domicile" is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are primarily
discharged.
   (h)   "Employee." One who works for income, wages, salary, commission or
other type of compensation in the service of and under the control of an
employer, and shall include temporary, provisional, casual or part-time
employment. The term includes any current or former employee who received a
federal Form W-2 from an employer for the preceding calendar year or years. Any
person from whom an employer is required to withhold for federal income tax
purposes shall, prima facie, be deemed an "employee".
   (i)   "Employer." An individual, proprietorship, association, corporation or
other entity, including nonprofit associations or corporations, that employs
one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis,
whether or not the employer is engaged in business as hereinbefore defined. The
term "employer" includes the State of Ohio, its political subdivisions and its
agencies, instrumentalities, boards, bureaus, departments, and any and all
other governmental units, as well as other governmental subdivisions, agencies,
instrumentalities, boards, bureaus, departments and any and all other
governmental units to the extent that any such body withholds tax on a
mandatory or voluntary basis. No rights, duties or obligations are imposed with
respect to any such body not otherwise authorized by law. An individual,
partnership, association, corporation or any other entity who books or
contracts for individuals and/or groups to perform or entertain at their place
of business or rents facilities for the purpose of providing such entertainment
shall be considered an "employer".  "Employer" does not include any person who
employs domestic help only for the person's private residence.
   (j)   "Final return." A return signed by the taxpayer complete with the
necessary schedules and attachments. A "final return" has the same meaning as a
complete return.
   (k)   "Finance Director." The City of Shelby Finance Director.
   (l)   "Fiscal year." An accounting period of 12 months or less ending on any
day other than December 31. Only fiscal years accepted by the Internal Revenue
Service for federal income tax purposes may be used for municipal income tax
purposes.
   (m)   "Generic form." An electronic or paper form designed for reporting
estimated municipal income taxes and/or annual municipal income tax liability,
and/or separate requests for refunds that contain all the information required
on the city's regular tax return, estimated payment forms and request for
refund forms, and are in a similar format that will allow processing of the
generic forms without altering the city's procedures for processing forms.
   (n)   "Gross receipts." The total revenue derived from sales, work done or
service rendered.
   (o)   "Income." All moneys, subject to limitations imposed by R.C. Chapter
718, derived from any source whatsoever, including but not limited to:
      (1)   All income, qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and
other income from whatever source received by residents of the city.
      (2)   All salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation and other
income from whatever source received by nonresidents for work done or services
performed or rendered or activities conducted in the city. Payments received as
a result of employment also include but are not limited to all types of
separation pay.
      (3)   The portion attributable to the city of the net profits of all
unincorporated businesses, associations, professions, corporations or other
entities, from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered, and
business or other activities conducted in the city.
   (p)   "Independent contractor." A person who, while performing services for
another, is not under the direction and/or control of the other person as to
the result to be accomplished by his or her work and as to the details and
means by which that result is accomplished.
   (q)   "Net profits." For taxable years prior to 2004, means the net gain
from the operation of a business, profession or enterprise after provision for
all cost and expense incurred in the conduct thereof, including reasonable
allowance for depreciation, depletion, amortization and reasonable additions to
reserve for bad debt, either paid or accrued in accordance with recognized
principles of accounting applicable to the method of accounting regularly
employed and without deduction of federal taxes based on income, and without
deducting taxes imposed by this chapter. For taxable years 2004 and later, see
"adjusted federal taxable income" defined above.
   (r)   "Nonresident." An individual domiciled outside the city.
   (s)   "Nonresident unincorporated business entity." An unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the city.
   (t)   "Ordinance." The municipal income tax ordinance of the city.  Employee
contributions to retirement plans by way of salary reduction are taxable to the
employee when deferred. No tax is to be assessed when payments are made from
these plans.
   (u)   "Person." Every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association,
corporation, S corporation or other entity. Whenever the term "person" is used
in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term as applied to an
unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to a corporation, the officer thereof.
   (v)   "Place of business." Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one or
more of his or her regular places of business outside the city solely by
consigning goods to an independent factor or contractor outside the city for
sale.
   (w)   "Qualifying wage." Wages as defined in IRC § 3121(a), without regard
to any wage limitations, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. "Qualifying wage" represents employees' income from
which municipal tax shall be deducted by the employer, and any wages not
considered a part of "qualifying wage" shall not be taxed by the city. This
definition is effective January 1, 2004, for taxable years 2004 and later.
   (x)   "Rental income." Payments received from the use or occupancy of
property. Included in "rental income" are lease cancellation payments, advance
rent, interest, expenses paid by a tenant in lieu of rent, and property or
services provided in lieu of rent. The value of the property or services paid
in lieu of rent must be reported as rental income. All necessary expenses,
i.e., depreciation, property taxes and repairs, are deductible from "rental
income".
   (y)   "Resident." An individual domiciled in the city.
   (z)   "Resident unincorporated business entity." An unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the city.
   (aa)   "Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation." Shall include
salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees and tips or
other income, including distributive share income from an unincorporated
business entity or association against which municipal income tax is not
already levied that may be earned, accrued or received by an individual,
whether directly or through an agent and whether in cash or in property, for
services rendered.
   (bb)   "Tangible property." All property not defined as intangible property.
   (cc)   "Taxable income." Income minus the deductions and credits allowed by
this chapter and rules and regulations. See "income" as defined in this
section.
   (dd)   "Taxable year." The calendar year or the fiscal year used as the
basis on which net profits or other taxable income are to be computed under the
chapter, and in the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the
period for which the return is required to be made.
   (ee)   "Taxpayer." A person, whether an individual, partnership, association
or any other entity, required by this chapter to file a return of income earned
or received or of net profit. It does not include any person that is a
disregarded entity or a qualifying Subchapter S (if the Subchapter S is a
subsidiary entity). The term "taxpayer" does include any other person who owns
the disregarded entity or Subchapter S subsidiary.
   (ff)   "Unincorporated businesses." All businesses not specifically
incorporated.
   (gg)   "Wage continuation plans." Include all types of plans in displacement
and/or termination of employees, voluntarily chosen by the employee and
revocable by the employee, paid by installments or in a lump sum payment.
   (hh)   "Working day." A full day or any fractional part of a day for which
an employee receives compensation, whether the services are performed or not
performed.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.02  COMMENCEMENT AND DURATION OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by the chapter is effective as to income and profits earned,
received or accruing on and after January 1, 1999. Payroll deductions must be
made against all income, salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses and other
compensation earned, received or accruing on and after that date. See §
880.11(b) for the breakdown of taxes levied and the allocation of funds.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (a)   Resident.
      (1)   In the case of the residents of the city, an annual tax of 1.25% is
imposed on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation earned, accrued, received or deferred on and after the effective
period of this chapter. For the purpose of determining the tax, the source of
the earnings and the place or places in or at which the services were rendered
is immaterial. All such earnings, wherever earned or paid, are taxable. The
location of the place from which the payment is made, or where the payment is
received, is immaterial.
         A.   "Qualifying wages" means wages, as defined in IRC § 3121(a),
without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
            1.   Deduct any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in IRC § 125.
            2.   Add the following amounts:
               a.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the
employee was employed by the employer prior to April 1, 1986;
               b.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of
a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. This division applies only to those amounts constituting
ordinary income.
               c.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in IRC § 401(k) or § 457. This division applies only to employee
contributions and employee deferrals.
               d.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in IRC § 3402(o)(2) and not included in wages.
         B.   The definition for "qualifying wage" is effective for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2004.
      (2)   The following is a non-inclusive list of items which are subject to
the tax:
         A.   Income, including but not limited to qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation that is subject to Medicare withholding in
accordance with IRC § 3121(a), whether directly or through an agent, and
whether in cash or in property for services rendered during the tax period as
an officer, director or employee of a corporation (including charitable and
other nonprofit organizations), or association or any other entity or person;
an officer or employee, whether elected, appointed or commissioned, of the
United States government or any of its agencies or of the State of Ohio or any
of its political subdivisions or agencies thereof; or any foreign country or
dependency except military pay exempted as stated in §
880.06.
         B.   Commissions earned by a taxpayer whether directly or through an
agent and whether in cash or in property, for services rendered during the
effective period of this chapter, regardless of how computed, by whom or
whosoever paid.
         C.   Fees, unless the fees are properly included as part of the net
profits of a trade, business, profession, or enterprise regularly carried on by
an unincorporated entity owned or partly owned by the individual (e.g., fees
which are taxable are those fees received by a director or officer of a
corporation).
         D.   Other compensation includes but is not limited to:
            1.   Tips received by waiters, waitresses and others;
            2.   Bonuses;
            3.   Monetary gifts and gratuities in connection with employment;
            4.   Compensation paid to domestic servants. See division (a)(2)G.
of this section for withholding requirement;
            5.   Fellowships, grants or stipends paid to a graduate student in
the full amount, except that any amount, allocated in writing for tuition,
books and laboratory fees, shall be excluded;
            6.   Dismissal pay, severance pay, reduction-in-force pay, and
other forms of termination pay;
            7.   Incentive payments;
            8.   If an employer pays into a tax shelter plan on behalf of an
employee in lieu of paying the amount as wages, the payments are considered
additional compensation to the employee and are subject to withholding tax;
            9.   Money received from covenants not to compete;
            10.   Severance pay;
            11.   Jury fees;
            12.   Witness fees;
            13.   Contributions to retirement plans are taxable when deferred.
Withholding applies to the full compensation;
            14.   Income deemed taxable per Federal Code § 89 or its
substantial equivalent;
            15.   Ordinary gains reported on federal Form 4797;
            16.   Stock options are taxable when exercised. The tax is due to
the municipality of the workplace and/or residence (i.e., if full credit is not
given by the resident municipality) at the time of the purchase. The amount of
taxable income is the difference between the price paid for the stock and the
fair market value of the stock at the time of purchase;
            17.   Disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option. The
taxpayer is responsible for payment of the tax if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the municipal income tax was not withheld by the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued.
         E.   Vacation, sickness, third-party sick pay, or any other types of
payments made under a wage or salary continuation plan, including "sub" pay
received from a union in lieu of wages during periods of absence from work,
which are taxable when paid. Payments made by an employer to an employee during
periods of absence from work are taxable when paid and at the tax rate in
effect at the time of the payment.
         F.   Where compensation is paid or received in property, its fair
market value, at the time of receipt, shall be subject to the tax and to
withholding. Board, lodging and similar compensation shall be included in
earnings at their fair market value.
         G.   In the case of domestics and other employees whose duties require
them to live at their place of employment or assignment, board and lodging
shall not be considered as taxable compensation. However, domestic servants are
subject to the city income tax under this chapter. See §
880.07 for estimated payment requirement.
         H.   Over-the-road drivers and others with similar situations,
reporting to a terminal, office and the like in the city must have a minimum of
25% of their wages withheld and allocated to the city where their terminal,
office and the like is located.
         I.   Income generated from any illegal federal, state or municipal
transaction.
         J.   Lottery, games of chance, gambling and sports winnings are
taxable. Deductions shall be allowed against gambling and sports winnings if
the taxpayer is considered a professional gambler for federal income tax
purposes. If the taxpayer is not considered a professional gambler for federal
income tax purposes, a per-prize deduction equal to the amount of income of the
prize from lottery, games of chance, gambling, and sports winnings, or a
deduction of $1,999.99 per prize, whichever is less, shall be allowed. If the
income is payable to the taxpayer in more than one year, the deduction applies
only in the first year in which the income is received.
         K.   When a resident or nonresident receives compensation for services
for sales of real estate or insurance from an employer whose situs is the city,
that total compensation is taxable at the city's tax rate and is payable to the
city. The site of the property sold or residence of the purchaser of insurance
has no bearing on the taxing of the compensation.
   (b)   Nonresident employee.
      (1)   In the case of individuals who are nonresidents of the city, there
is imposed under this chapter an annual tax of 1.25% on all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions and the other compensation, earned, accrued,
received or deferred on or after the effective date of this chapter, for work
done or services rendered or performed within the city, whether the
compensation or remuneration is received or earned directly or through an agent
and whether paid in cash or property. The location of the place from which
payment is made is immaterial.
      (2)   The items subject to tax under this section are the same as those
listed and defined in division (a)(2) of this section that relate to
employment. For methods of computing the extent of the work or services
performed within the city, and cases involving compensation for personal
services partly within and partly outside the city, see §
880.07(c).
      (3)   Twelve-day occasional entrant rule:
         A.   A nonresident individual who works in the city 12 or fewer days
per year shall be considered an occasional entrant, and shall not be subject to
the city municipal income tax for those 12 days. For purposes of the 12-day
calculation, any portion of a day worked in the city shall be counted as one
day worked in the city.
         B.   Beginning with the thirteenth day, the employer of the individual
shall begin withholding city income tax from remuneration paid by the employer
to the individual, and shall remit the withheld income tax to the city in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Since the individual can no
longer be considered to have been an occasional entrant, the employer is
further required to remit taxes on income earned in the city by the individual
for the first 12 days.
         C.   If the individual is self-employed, it shall be the
responsibility of the individual to remit the appropriate income tax to the
city.
         D.   The 12-day occasional entry rule does not apply to entertainers
or professional athletes, their employees or individuals who perform services
on their behalf, or to promoters and booking agents of the entertainment events
and sporting events.
   (c)   Resident unincorporated businesses.
      (1)   In the case of resident unincorporated businesses, professions,
enterprises, undertakings or other entities conducted, operated, engaged in,
prosecuted or carried on, irrespective of whether the taxpayer has an office or
place of business in the city, there is imposed an annual tax of 1.25% on the
net profits earned and/or received during the effective period of this chapter
attributable to the city, determined by the method or formula provided for in §
880.04, derived from sales made, work done or services performed or rendered
and business or other activities conducted in the city.
      (2)   The tax imposed on resident associations or other unincorporated
entities is upon the entities rather than the individual members or owners
thereof. For tax on that part of a resident owner's distributive share of net
profits not taxed against the entity, see division (d) of this section.
      (3)   The tax imposed by this chapter is imposed on all resident
unincorporated entities having net profits attributable to the city under the
method of allocation provided for in this chapter, regardless of where the
owner or owners of the resident unincorporated business entity resides.
      (4)   Resident unincorporated entities owned by one or more persons, all
of whom are residents of the city, and having all income allocable to the city
or having any income allocable to other municipalities not levying a similar
tax, shall disregard the method of allocation provided for in this chapter and
pay to the city the tax on the entire net profits thereof. Payment of the tax
by the entity on the entire net profits thereof shall constitute payment of all
the tax due from the owners or members thereof on their distributive shares of
the entity's net profits.
   (d)   Resident’s distributive share of profits of a resident unincorporated
business entity, not attributable to the city.  In the case of a resident
individual who is a member, partner, shareholder/ owner or part owner of a
resident unincorporated entity, there is imposed a 1.25% tax on the
individual’s distributive share of net profits earned during the effective
period of this chapter not attributable to the city under the method of the
allocation provided for in this chapter, and not taxed against the entity;
provided, however, that if any portion thereof is allocable to another
municipality, credit for tax due or paid to the other municipality shall be
claimed in accordance with §
880.10.
   (e)   Nonresident unincorporated businesses.
      (1)   In the case of nonresident unincorporated businesses, professions,
enterprises, undertakings or other activities conducted, operated, engaged in,
prosecuted or carried on, there is imposed an annual tax of 1.25% on the net
profits earned and/or received during the effective period of this attributable
to the business’s activity derived from activity in the city.
      (2)   A nonresident unincorporated business entity which has a branch or
branches, office or offices and/or store or stores, warehouse, or other place
or places in which the entity's business is transacted, located in the city,
shall be considered to be conducting, operating, prosecuting or carrying on a
trade, business, profession, enterprise, undertaking or other activity to the
full extent of the sum total of all transactions originating or consummated in,
by or through the city branch, office, store, warehouse or other place of
business, including:
         A.   Billings made on such transactions;
         B.   Services rendered;
         C.   Shipments made;
         D.   Goods, chattels, merchandise and the like sold;
         E.   Commissions, fees or other remuneration.
      (3)   In determining the proportion or amount of the taxable net profits
of a nonresident unincorporated business entity having a place or places of
business within and outside of the city, the business entity may at its option
use and apply the business allocation percentage formula set forth in §
880.04(b).
   (f)   Resident’s share of profits of a nonresident unincorporated business
entity not attributable to the city.  In the case of a resident individual who
is a member, partner, owner or part owner of a nonresident unincorporated
entity, there is imposed a 1.25% tax on the individual’s distributive share of
net profits earned during the effective period of this chapter not attributable
to the owner’s resident community under the method of allocation provided for
in this chapter; provided however, that the resident shall be entitled to
credit for tax paid to another taxing municipality in accordance with §
880.10.
   (g)   Corporations.
      (1)   In the case of a corporation (including S corporation) doing
business in the city, whether domestic or foreign, and whether domiciled in the
city or elsewhere, there is imposed an annual tax of 1.25% on that part of the
net profits earned, accrued and/or received during the effective period of this
chapter of such corporations, which is earned by the corporations as a result
of work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities
conducted in the city.
      (2)   The provisions of division (e)(2) of this section are applicable to
the corporations.
      (3)   A corporation doing business both within and outside the city
shall, in determining the part of the net profits, which are taxable under this
chapter, calculate its net profit attributable to the city in accordance with §
880.04.
      (4)   Corporations which are required by the provisions of R.C. §§
5727.38 to 5727.41 to pay an excise tax in any taxable year as defined by this
chapter, may exclude that part of their gross receipts upon which the excise
tax is paid from their net profits for that taxable year. In this case,
expenses incurred in the production of the gross receipts shall not be deducted
in computing net profits subject to the tax imposed by the chapter.
   (h)   Effective period of tax.
      (1)   The tax imposed by the rate and income taxable section of this
chapter shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to income, salaries,
wages, bonuses, incentive payments, commissions, fees and other compensation
earned during the effective period of this chapter.
      (2)   The tax imposed by the rate and income taxable section of this
chapter, with respect to net profits of trade, businesses, professions,
enterprises, undertakings and other activities is on the net profits earned,
accrued and/or received during the effective period of this chapter.
   (i)   Amplification.  Net profits ("adjusted federal taxable income") means,
for tax years 2004 and later, a C corporation's federal taxable income before
net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal
Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (2)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (i)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in IRC § 1221 or § 1231.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (i)(4)B. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of
an asset described in IRC § 1221 or § 1231.
         B.   Division (i)(4)A of this section does not apply to the extent the
income or gain is income or gain described in IRC § 1245 or § 1250.
      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income.
      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust and regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed
as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.
      (7)   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation and is not an individual,
the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income as if the taxpayer
were a C corporation, except:
         A.   Guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to
a partner, former partner, member or former member shall not be allowed as a
deductible expense; and
         B.   Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement
plan with respect to an owner or owner-employee of the taxpayer, amounts paid
or accrued to or for health insurance for an owner or owner-employee, and
amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for an owner or owner-employee
shall not be allowed as a deduction.
   (j)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   Any affiliated group which files a consolidated return for federal
income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code may file a
consolidated return with the city. However, once the affiliated group has
elected to file a consolidated return or a separate return with the city, the
affiliated group may not change their method of filing in any subsequent tax
year without written approval from the city.
      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carries on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the city
constituting a portion only of its total business, the Finance Director shall
require such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to
ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the city by reason of
transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock
ownership, interlocking directorates, or transactions with the division,
branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity of by some other method, he or
she shall make such allocation as he or she deems appropriate to produce a fair
and proper allocation of net profits to the city.
   (k)   Loss carry-forward.  Loss carry-forward shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 48-2005, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.04  DETERMINATION OF ALLOCATION OF TAX.
   (a)   Business allocation percentage method.
      (1)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable
status in the city for purposes of income taxation in the same proportion as
the average ratio of:
         A.   The average original cost (i.e., the total costs as shown on the
federal return less allocable depreciation as shown on the entity's federal
return as filed) of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by
the taxpayer in the business or profession in the city during the taxable
period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal
property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the
same period, wherever situated.
            1.   As used in division (a)(1)A. of this section, "real property"
shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of that
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight.
            2.   "Gross rents" means the actual sum of money or other
consideration payable, directly or indirectly, by the taxpayer for the use or
possession of property, including:
               a.   Any amount paid for the use or possession of real and
tangible personal property or any part thereof, whether designated as a fixed
sum of money or as a percentage of sales profits or otherwise; and
               b.   Any amount paid as additional rent or in lieu of rent, such
as interest, taxes, insurance, repairs or other amounts required to be paid by
the terms of a lease or other arrangement.
         B.   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid during
the taxable period to persons employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the city to salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the business or
profession, wherever their services are performed. Wages, salaries and other
compensation shall be included to the extent that they represent qualifying
wages.
            1.   Salaries and reasonable compensation paid to owners or
credited to the account of owners or partners during the period covered by the
return are considered wages for the purpose of this computation.
            2.   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation shall be
computed on the cash or accrual basis in accordance with the method of
accounting used in the computation of the entire taxable income or loss of the
taxpayer.
            3.   In the case of an employee who performs services both within
and without the city, the amount treated as compensation for services performed
within the city shall be deemed to be:
               a.   In the case of an employee whose compensation depends
directly on the volume of business secured by him or her, such as a salesperson
on a commission basis, the amount received by him or her for the business
attributable to his or her efforts within the city;
               b.   In the case of an employee whose compensation depends on
other results achieved, the proportion of the total compensation received which
the value of his or her services within the city bears to the value of all his
or her services; and
               c.   In the case of an employee compensated on a time basis, the
proportion of the total amount received by him or her, which is working time
within the city, is of his or her total working time.
         C.   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in the city to gross receipts of
the business or profession during the same period from sales and services,
wherever made or performed.
      (2)   As used in division (a)(l)C. of this section, "sales made in the
city" means:
         A.   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within
the city, regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock
of goods within the city.
         B.   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within
the city, regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point
outside the city, if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from the solicitation or promotion.
         C.   All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from an
office, store, warehouse, factory or place within the city to purchasers
outside the city, regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not,
through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion
of sales at the place where delivery is made. All solicitation of customers
outside of the city by mail, telephone, fax, electronic mail or other
electronic media from an office or place of business within the city shall be
considered a solicitation of "sales within the city".
         D.   Charges for work done or services performed incident to a sale,
whether or not included in the price of the property, shall be considered gross
receipts from the sales.
         E.   In the application of the foregoing divisions a carrier shall be
considered the agent of the seller regardless of the freight on board point or
other conditions of the sale; and the place at which orders are accepted or
contracts legally consummated shall be immaterial.
      (3)   Add the percentages determined in accordance with division (a)(1)
of this section, or such of the aforesaid percentages as may be applicable to
the particular taxpayer's business, and divide the total so obtained by the
number of percentages used in ascertaining the total. The result so obtained is
the business allocation percentage. In determining the average percentage, a
factor shall not be excluded from the computation merely because the factor is
found to be allocable entirely outside the city.  A factor is excluded only
when it does not exist anywhere.
      (4)   The business allocation percentage determined in division (a)(3) of
this section shall be applied to the entire taxable net profits of the taxpayer
wherever derived to determine the net profits allocable to the city.
   (b)   Substitute method.
      (1)   In the event that the foregoing apportionment formula does not
produce an equitable result, another basis may be substituted, under uniform
regulations, so as to produce the result.
      (2)   If the taxpayer makes application to the Finance Director to
substitute other factors in the formula, or to use a different method to
allocate net profits, the application must be made, in writing, not less than
60 days before the due date of the annual return without regard to extension,
and shall state the specific grounds on which the substitution of factors or
use of a different method is requested and the relief sought to be obtained. No
specific form need be followed in making the application. If, pursuant to a
taxpayer's request, a substitute method of allocation is authorized by the
Finance Director, a statement must be attached to the annual return for the
year of change describing the substitute method of allocation and setting forth
the date the substitute method was authorized by the Finance Director.
      (3)   If the Finance Director approves the use of books and records as a
substitute method, the following shall apply:
         A.   The net profits allocable to the city from business, professional
or other activities conducted in the city by corporations or unincorporated
entities (whether resident or nonresident) may be determined from the records
of the taxpayer only if the taxpayer has bona fide records which disclose with
reasonable accuracy what portion of his or her net profits is attributable to
that part of his or her activities conducted within the city.
         B.   If the books and records of the taxpayer are used as the basis
for apportioning net profits, a statement must accompany the return explaining
the manner in which the apportionment is made in sufficient detail to enable
the Administrator to determine whether the net profits attributable to the city
are apportioned with reasonable accuracy.
         C.   In determining the income allocable to the city from the books
and records of a taxpayer, an adjustment may be made for the contribution made
to the production of the income by headquarters activities of the taxpayer,
whether the headquarters is within or without the city.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.05  RENTAL INCOME FROM REAL ESTATE.
   Rentals received by the taxpayer are to be included only if and to the
extent that the rental, ownership, management or operation of the real estate
from which the rentals are derived (whether so rented, managed or operated by
taxpayer individually or through agents or other representatives) constitutes a
business activity of the taxpayer in whole or in part.  Following are the
circumstances under which, in any instance, the rental of any real property
shall or shall not be deemed to be a business activity:
   (a)   Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of $100 per month, it
shall be prima facie evidence that the rental, ownership, management or
operation of the properties is a business activity of the taxpayer, and the net
income of the rental property shall be subject to tax; provided that in case of
commercial property, the owner shall be considered engaged in a business
activity when the rental is based on a fixed or fluctuating percentage of gross
or net sales, receipts or profits of the lessee, whether or not the rental
exceeds $100 per month; and provided, further, that in case of farm property,
the owner shall be considered engaged in a business activity when he or she
shares in the crops or when the rental is based on a percentage of the gross or
net receipts derived from the farm, whether or not the gross income exceeds
$100 per month; and provided, further, that the person who operates a rooming
house shall be considered in business whether or not the gross income exceeds
$100 per month.
   (b)   In determining the amount of gross monthly rental of any real
property, periods during which (by reason of vacancy or any other cause)
rentals are not received shall not be taken into consideration by the taxpayer.
   (c)   Rentals received by a taxpayer engaged in the business of buying and
selling real estate shall be considered as part of business income.
   (d)   Real property, as the term is used in this chapter, shall include
commercial property, residential property, farm property, and any and all other
types of real estate.
   (e)   In determining the taxable net income from rentals, the deductible
expense shall be of the same nature, extent and amount as are allowed by the
Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax purposes. Passive losses as
deemed by the IRS Code are not deductible in this determination.
   (f)   Residents of the city are subject to taxation upon net income from
rentals, to the extent above specified, on all properties located in the city,
and on all properties located outside the city, the net income of which is not
subject to city income tax in the other community. In the case of residents of
the city, if the net income of properties located outside the city is subject
to city income tax in another community, then the taxpayer shall be allowed a
credit for the amount paid by him or her on his or her behalf in the other
municipality. This credit is to be applied only to the extent of the tax
assessed by the city.  Nonresidents of the city are subject to this taxation
only if the real property is situated within the city.  Nonresidents, in
determining whether gross monthly rentals exceed $100 shall take into
consideration only real estate situated within the city.
   (g)   Income from royalties or copyrights is not to be included.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.06  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Exemptions, specific.  The following income is exempt from the tax
imposed by this chapter:
      (1)   Pay or allowance of active members of the Armed Forces of the
United States and of members of their reserve components, including the Ohio
National Guard. This exception includes not only the military pay and
allowances received by the members themselves, but also military pay and
allowances, such as dependency allowances, received by another person and by
reason of the member's service. Any bonus or additional compensation paid to a
person by the United States, State of Ohio, or any other state for active
service in the Army, Navy or Air Force shall also be exempt from tax.
      (2)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions is exempt from the tax imposed by this
chapter to the extent that the income is derived from tax-exempt real estate,
tax-exempt tangible or intangible property or tax exempt activities, and only
to the extent that the income is exempt from federal income tax. The income and
profits of organizations exempt from federal income tax under § 501(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code shall be exempt from taxation under this chapter.
      (3)   Payments for the relief of poverty, unemployment insurance
benefits, old age pensions or similar payments, including permanent disability
benefits received from local, state or federal government or charitable,
religious or educational organizations, are exempt from the tax imposed by this
chapter. The exempted benefits include all types of payments and allowances
made or given by the governments or organizations for the relief or correction
of poverty, unemployment, delinquency, problems of health or advanced age, lack
of education and similar problems. The exempted benefits include but are not
limited to: aid to dependent children and the aged; rent, food and clothing
allowances or subsidies; job training allowances; Social Security and Medicare
benefits; and workers' compensation benefits.
      (4)   Salaries and wages not considered received by the individual member
but by the religious order of organization under a vow of poverty are exempt
from the tax imposed by this chapter.
      (5)   Housing allowances for clergy to the extent that allowance is used
to provide a home are exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. The clergy
must be duly ordained, commissioned or licensed by a religious body.
      (6)   Gratuities not in the nature of compensation for services rendered.
      (7)   Disability benefits (not under a wage continuation plan), including
the proceeds of health and accident insurance and similar benefits received
after an employee has reached the employer's minimum retirement age, and that
is reported to the retired employee on federal Form 1099-R or its substantive
equivalent.
      (8)   Inheritances.
      (9)   Scholarships and student grants-in-aid, but not fellowships
described in §
880.03(a)(2)D.5.
      (10)   Death benefits, retirement benefits, payments from IRS qualified
retirement plans or similar retirement plans and/or pensions, annuities and
similar payments made to a retired employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan after termination of employment and
retirement of the employee.
      (11)   Gifts not in connection with services rendered or work performed
are exempt.
      (12)   Cash or property received under a will or under the Statute of
Descent and Distribution is not taxable.
      (13)   Receipts by bona fide charitable, religious and educational
organizations and associations, when those receipts are from seasonal or casual
entertainment, amusement; sports events and health and welfare activities, when
any such are conducted by charitable, religious or educational organizations or
associations, are exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. This exemption
refers only to the receipts of the organization and not to the compensation of
employees.
      (14)   Alimony received. Support payments made by one spouse for the
benefit of the other spouse or children in connection with any divorce or
separation, whether or not awarded by the court, shall be deemed "alimony" for
purposes of this exemption.
      (15)   Personal earnings of any individual under 18 years of age are
exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. However, for the year in which
they become 18, the individual is subject to tax from their birth date until
the end of the year.
      (16)   Compensatory damages from personal injuries or otherwise is exempt
from the tax imposed by this chapter. Punitive damages are not exempt from
taxation.
      (17)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness,
interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed by the State of
Ohio which the city is specifically prohibited from taxing, and income of a
decedent's estate during the period of administration (exempt income from the
operation of a business) are exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter.
      (18)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or § 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official, to the extent that the compensation
does not exceed $1,000 annually.
      (19)   Salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation, other income and
net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States
Constitution or any Act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their
political subdivisions to impose net income tax derived from interstate
commerce, are exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter.
      (20)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, other income
and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution of the
State of Ohio or any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the power of a
municipality to impose net income taxes, are exempt from the tax imposed by
this chapter.
   (b)   Exemptions, general.  No person shall be exempt from the imposition of
this income tax unless specifically excluded or exempted by the laws of the
State of Ohio, the municipality's ordinances or these rules and regulations.
Upon request of the Finance Director, any person who claims exemption from tax
under this chapter shall provide detailed information to show the basis of the
claim. The information shall be furnished 30 days after receipt of the request.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.07  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   Dates and requirements for filing.
      (1)   Each person residing in the city, 18 years of age or older, who
engages in business or whose income, wages, salaries, commissions and other
compensation are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, shall, whether or
not a tax be due thereon, file a return on or before April 15 of each year with
the Finance Director on a form furnished by or obtainable from the Finance
Director, or on other forms deemed acceptable by the Finance Director, setting
forth the aggregate amount of income, wages, salaries, commissions and other
compensation earned and/or received and/or net profits earned and/or gross
income from the business, less allowable expenses, or the net profits earned
and/or gross income from the business less allowable expenses in the
acquisition of the gross income earned during the preceding year and subject to
the tax, together with such other pertinent information as the Finance Director
may require, including but not limited to copies of all W-2 forms, 1099
Miscellaneous Income forms and all applicable federal schedules. Retired
persons whose income is derived solely from pensions, Social Security, interest
or dividends need not file the annual tax return, provided a completed
exemption form is on file with the Finance Director. When the return is made
for a fiscal year or other period different from the calendar year, the return
shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
close of the fiscal year or other period.
      (2)   The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of filing
thereof, pay to the Finance Director the amount of tax shown to be due and
unpaid by the return. No payment will be required for tax due less than $5. If,
pursuant to the provisions of division (h) of this section, the taxpayer has at
the time of making the final return overpaid his or her tax, the taxpayer shall
show the amount of overpayment and may in the return either:
         A.   Request a refund thereof; or
         B.   Request that the amount thereof be credited against the amount
which will be required to be paid by taxpayer on the next succeeding
installment of tax which may become due.
      (3)   Where any portion of the tax otherwise due shall have been paid by
the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of divisions (c) and (g) of this
section, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, pursuant
to §
880.10, credit for the amount so paid shall be deducted from the amount shown
to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the final return.
      (4)   Upon written request of the taxpayer, the Finance Director may
extend the time for filing the annual return for a period of not more than six
months or not more than 30 days beyond any extension requested of and granted
by the Federal Internal Revenue Department for the filing of the federal income
tax return. For taxable years subsequent to 2004, the extended due date shall
be the last day of the month to which the due date of the federal income tax
return has been extended, the extension request may be made by filing a copy of
the taxpayer's request for a federal filing extension, or by filing a written
request. The Finance Director may deny the extension if the taxpayer's income
tax account with the city is delinquent in any way.
      (5)   Items included on federal Form 2106 are eligible as deductions,
subject to review and approval by the City Income Tax Office. To qualify for
the deductions, eligible expenses shown on the Form 2106 must exceed 2% of the
gross income taxable to the city. Only those expenses exceeding the 2% amount
will be eligible for deduction. If submitting a Form 2106, the taxpayer must
also submit a copy of the corresponding Schedule A. Deductions shall be
allocated to the city and other municipalities in the same proportion that
income has been allocated.
      (6)   When necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in §§
880.08 and
880.10. Such amended returns shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Finance Director. A taxpayer may not change the methods of accounting (i.e.,
cash or accrual) or apportionment of net profits after the due date for the
filing the original return.
   (b)   Reconciliation with federal return.  In a form satisfactory to the
Finance Director, there shall be submitted with each return filed by a taxpayer
subject to the federal income tax, a reconciliation between the amount shown in
the return filed with the Finance Director and the business income reported to
the Federal Internal Revenue Department.  If, as a result of a change made in
business income by the Federal Internal Revenue Service, or by a judicial
decision, an additional amount will result as owing to the city, a report of
the change shall be filed by the taxpayer within 30 days after receipt of the
final notice of the change from the federal authorities or after final decision
of a court adjudicating any such federal income tax liability.
   (c)   Withholding collection at source.
      (1)   It is the duty of each employer (as hereinbefore defined) who
employs one or more persons on a wage, salary, commission or other compensation
or other income basis, to deduct, from compensation paid to any employee
subject to this chapter, the tax of 1.25% of the income, wage, salary,
commission or other compensation due by the employer to the employee.
         A.   The tax shall be deducted by the employer from:
            1.   All compensation paid to employees or deferred on behalf of
employees who are nonresidents of the city for services rendered, work
performed, or other activities engaged in to earn the compensation, within the
city; and
            2.   From the gross amount of all income, wages, salaries,
commissions or other compensation paid to employees or deferred on behalf of
employees who are residents of the city, regardless of the place where the
services are rendered.
         B.   If the taxes withheld by an employer for the city during the
previous tax year averaged $400 per month or more, payments of tax withheld for
the current tax year must be made on a monthly basis and shall be made on or
before the last day of the month following the end of the month for which taxes
were withheld.
         C.   If the taxes withheld by an employer for the city during the
previous tax year averaged less than $400 per month, payments of tax withheld
may be made quarterly on or before the last day of the month following the end
of the quarter, subject to the approval of the Finance Director. The Finance
Director may revoke the approval of quarterly filing and payments whenever he
or she has reason to believe that the conditions for granting the authorization
have changed, were judged incorrectly, were not met, or when it is in the best
interest of the city to do so.  Notice of withdrawal shall be made in writing,
and in that case, the employer must begin to file in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   All employers who or which maintain an office or other place of
business in the city are required to make the collections and deductions
specified in this section. Employers who do not maintain a permanent office or
place of business in the city, but who are subject to tax on net profits under
this chapter, are considered to be employers within the city subject to the
requirement of withholding.
      (3)   The mere fact that the tax is not withheld will not relieve the
employee of the responsibility of filing a return and paying the tax on the
income received.
      (4)   All individuals, businesses, employers, brokers or others doing
business who engage persons, either on a commission basis, or as independent
contractors, subcontractors, or contract employees who are not subject to
withholding, shall indicate the total amount of earnings, payments, commissions
and bonuses to such as are residents of the city, or who do business in the
city, on copies of federal Form 1099, or shall attach a list which shall
indicate Social Security numbers, names, addresses and amounts paid.
      (5)   In the case of employees who are nonresidents of the city, the
amount to be deducted is 1.25% of the compensation paid with respect to
personal services rendered in the city.  Where a nonresident receives
compensation for personal services rendered or performed partly within and
partly outside the city, the withholding employer shall deduct, withhold and
remit that portion of the compensation which is earned within the city in
accordance with the following rules of apportionment:
         A.   Employees compensated on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly
basis shall be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter as follows:
            1.   Deduction and withholding.  The deduction and withholding
shall attach to the personal service compensation for the exact amount of pay
received for services performed in the city, when the exact amount of pay can
be established. When the exact determination of amounts earned or derived in
the city is possible, the income of employees who are compensated on an hourly,
daily, weekly or monthly basis must be apportioned to the city by multiplying
the gross income, wherever earned, from the employment, which includes
employment carried on in the city, by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
number of days spent working in the city and the denominator of which is the
total working days, including holidays, vacation days, sick days and paid or
unpaid leave, unless for travel outside the United States, not to exceed 260
days. In those cases, the taxpayer must add to both the numerator and the
denominator those weekend days in which the taxpayer was required to work while
outside of the United States. The result is the amount of the nonresident's
income allocable to the city.
            2.   Apportionment where employee performs services in more than
one municipality each day. In the case of an employee compensated hourly,
daily, weekly or monthly, who regularly performs services in more than one
municipality each day, income is apportioned to the particular municipality
when multiplying the gross income, wherever earned, from the employment which
includes employment carried on in the particular municipality, by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of hours spent working in the particular
municipality and the denominator of which is the total number of working hours.
         B.   If the nonresident is a salesperson, agent or other employee
whose compensation on the basis of commissions depends directly on the volume
of business transacted by him or her, the deducting and withholding shall
attach to the portion of the entire compensation which the volume of business
transacted by the employee within the city bears to the volume of business
transacted by him or her within and outside the city.
         C.   The deducting and withholding of personal service compensation of
all other employees, including officers of corporations, shall attach to the
portion of the personal service compensation of the employee which the total
number of working days employed within the city bears to the total number of
working days employed within and outside the city.
         D.   If it is impossible to apportion the earnings as provided above
because of the peculiar nature of the service of the employee, or the unusual
basis of compensation, apportionment shall be made in accordance with the facts
and the tax deducted and withheld accordingly.
   (d)   Returns of tax withheld.
      (1)   Each employer, on or before February 28, unless written request for
30-day extension is made to and granted by the Finance Director, following any
calendar year in which the deductions have been made, or should have been made,
by an employer, shall file with the Finance Director an information return
(Shelby Withholding Statement of Wages Paid and Shelby Income Tax Withheld) for
each employee from whom income tax has been or should have been withheld,
showing the name and address of the employee, the total amount of income,
wages, salaries, commissions and other compensation paid to the employee during
the year and the amount of city income tax withheld from each employee.
      (2)   For corporations, a copy of the federal income tax return must
accompany the city income tax return upon filing.
      (3)   For adjustment of errors in returns of tax withheld by employers
see division (h) hereof.
   (e)   Limitation on credit for tax paid at source.  The failure of any
employer, residing either within or outside the city, to collect the tax and to
make any return prescribed herein shall not relieve the employee from the
payment of the tax in compliance with these regulations with respect to the
making of returns and the payment of taxes.
   (f)   Status and liability of employers.  The officers and/or the employees
having control or supervision of or charged with the responsibility of filing
the report and making payment are personally liable for failure to file the
report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The dissolution,
bankruptcy or reorganization of a corporation, association or other entity does
not discharge an officer's or employee's liability for a prior failure of the
corporation to file returns or pay tax due.
   (g)   Declarations of estimated tax.
      (1)   A declaration of estimated tax shall be filed by every taxpayer who
will have taxable income during the year, the tax on which is not or will not
be withheld in full or in part by an employer or employers. The declaration
must be filed only if the estimate of tax that will not be withheld exceeds
$100.
      (2)   All other taxpayers, as defined in this chapter and in these
regulations, subject to the taxes imposed in §
880.03, and every taxpayer who anticipates any income or net profits not
subject to withholding in whole or in part, shall file with the Finance
Director a declaration of his or her estimated tax as provided in this division
(g).
      (3)   Effective January 1, 2003, the declaration of estimated tax to be
paid the city by taxpayers who are individuals shall be accompanied by a
payment on of at least one-fourth of the declaration amount and at least a
similar amount shall be paid on or before July 31 and October 31 of the taxable
year, and January 31 of the following year.
      (4)   Effective January 1, 2003, the declaration of estimated tax to be
paid to the city by corporations and associations shall be accompanied by a
payment of at least one-fourth of the declaration amount and at least a similar
amount shall be paid on or before June 15, September 15 and December 15. In the
case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the second, third and fourth quarterly
estimated payments shall be due on the fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth and
twelfth months of the taxable year, respectively.
      (5)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration within 105 days after the beginning of each fiscal year or period.
      (6)   The declarations so required shall be filed upon a form furnished
by or obtainable from the Finance Director, or on a generic form approved by
the Finance Director. Any taxpayer who has filed an estimate for federal income
tax purposes may, in making the declaration required hereunder, simply state
therein that the figures therein contained are the same figures used by the
taxpayer in making the declaration of his or her estimate for the federal
income tax. However, in addition to that statement, any such taxpayer may, in
the declaration, modify and adjust the declared income so as to exclude
therefrom income which is not subject to tax under this chapter.
      (7)   Any estimate filed hereunder may be amended by the filing of an
amendment at the time prescribed for the payment of any installment of tax paid
in accordance with divisions (g)(8) and (g)(9) of this section.
      (8)   No penalties or interest shall be assessed for not filing a
declaration or not making payments or making late payments, on any resident
taxpayer who was not domiciled in the city on the first day of January in the
year in which they became subject to estimated payments.
      (9)   No penalties or interest shall be assessed on estimated payments if
the taxpayer has remitted an amount equal to 100% of the previous year's tax
liability, provided that the previous year reflected a 12-month period, or if
90% of the actual liability has been received.
   (h)   Collection of deficiencies and allowance of credit for overpayments.
      (1)   If, as a result of investigation conducted by the Finance Director,
a return is found to be incorrect, the Finance Director is authorized to assess
and collect any underpayment of tax withheld at the source or any underpayment
of tax owing by any taxpayer with respect to earnings or net profits, or both.
If no return has been filed and a tax is found to be owing, the tax actually
owing may be assessed and collected with or without the formality of obtaining
a delinquent return from the employer or taxpayer.
      (2)   Should it be disclosed, either as a result of an investigation by
the Finance Director or through the medium of the filing of a claim or petition
for refund or credit, that an overpayment has been made, the Finance Director
will refund the overpayment.
      (3)   The employer will in every instance be required to pay the full tax
which should have been withheld, even though he or she may fail to withhold
from the employee. If too much has been withheld, the excess shall be refunded
by the employer to the employee. While the withholding agent (the employer)
will be expected to maintain complete records of such adjustments with the
employees, any such adjustment made during any month will not need to be
reflected in the withholding return or disclosed by schedules or statements
thereto attached.
      (4)   In those cases in which too much has been withheld by an employer
from an employee and remitted to the Finance Director and there has been a
termination of the employee-employer relationship, the taxpayer (the employee)
may obtain an adjustment by application to the Finance Director.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 47-2005, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 6-2007,
passed 5-7-2007)
§ 880.08  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES; REFUND OF OVERPAYMENTS.
   (a)   Collection of unpaid taxes.
      (1)   All taxes imposed by this chapter remaining unpaid when the same
have become due, together with all interest and penalties thereon, become a
debt due the city from the taxpayer, and are recoverable as other debts in
suits instituted by the Director of Law.
      (2)   Employers who or which, although obligated under this chapter to
withhold and remit to the Finance Director the taxes required to be withheld at
the source, as set forth in §
880.07(c), shall fail to so withhold and/or remit, become liable to the city in
an action in a court of law to enforce the payment of the debt created by the
failure.
      (3)   When a final return is filed as prescribed in §
880.07 and a deficiency is determined to be due to the city, action to collect
the same must be brought within three years after the tax was due or the return
was filed, whichever is later. However, in the case of fraud, failure to file a
return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecution may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (b)   Refunds.
      (1)   Should it appear that any taxpayer has paid more than the amount of
the tax to which the city is entitled under the provisions of this chapter, a
refund of the amount so overpaid shall be made, provided a proper claim for
refund of the overpayment of tax has been filed by the taxpayer, or the same
may be applied toward the declaration of tax due for the ensuing year. Claims
for refunds shall be made on forms prescribed by and obtainable from the
Finance Director, or on a generic form approved by the Finance Director.
Refunds for days worked out of the city are available only to nonresidents, and
refunds shall be computed by dividing total wages by total days worked in order
to determine an average daily wage. The work year shall be considered 260 days.
Saturdays and Sundays shall not normally be considered work days. Wage
continuation plans of any type, including but not limited to vacation days,
holidays, personal days, and sick days, are deemed to be days spent in the city
for purposes of a refund calculation. Additions, deletions or other changes to
the method for calculating refunds shall be at the discretion of the Finance
Director.
      (2)   All applications for refunds shall be made within three years of
the due date of a final return, or three months after the determination of the
federal income tax liability, whichever is later. However, the following shall
apply regarding refunds of tax withheld from non-qualified deferred
compensation plans (NDCP):
         A.   A taxpayer may be eligible for a refund if the taxpayer has
suffered a loss from an NDCP. The loss will be considered sustained only in the
taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and
property pursuant to the NDCP. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of
money and property will be made by the NDCP.
         B.   A taxpayer who receives income as a result of payments from an
NDCP, and that income is less than the amount of income deferred to the NDCP
and upon which municipal tax was withheld, then a refund will be issued on the
amount representing the difference between the deferred income that was taxed
and the income received from the NDCP.  If different tax rates applied to the
tax years in which deferrals, a weighted average of the different tax rates
will be used to compute the refund amount.
         C.   Refunds shall be allowed only if the loss is attributable to the
bankruptcy of the employer who had established the NDCP, or the employee's
failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer's terms and conditions
necessary to receive the non-qualified compensation.
      (3)   Refunds for days worked out of the city are available only to
nonresidents, and refunds shall be computed by dividing total wages by total
days worked in order to determine an average daily wage. The work year shall be
considered 260 days. Saturdays and Sundays shall not normally be considered
work days. Wage continuation plans of any type, including but not limited to
vacation days, holidays, personal days and sick days, are deemed to be days
spent in the city for purposes of the refund calculation. Additions, deletions
or other changes to the method for calculating refunds shall be at the
discretion of the Finance Director.
      (4)   No refund will be made for an amount less than $5.
      (5)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city but should have
been deposited with another municipality is allowable by the city as a refund
but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds. Income tax that should
have been deposited with the city but was deposited with another municipality
shall be subject to recovery by the city.  The city will allow a non-refundable
credit for any amount owed the city that is in excess of the amount to be
refunded by the other municipality, as long as the tax rate of the other
municipality is the same or higher than the city's tax rate. If the city's tax
rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of the rates is also
subject to collection by the city.
      (6)   The Finance Director may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided the suit is begun three years after making the refund, except that the
suit may be brought within six years if any of the refund was induced by fraud
or misrepresentation of material fact.
   (c)   Application of delinquent payments. Payments received for delinquent
liabilities shall first be applied to unpaid penalty and interest assessments,
beginning with the oldest year for which they are due, and then shall be
applied sequentially to each subsequent year for which penalty and interest
delinquencies exist. When penalty and interest delinquencies no longer remain,
payments will be applied to delinquent taxes owed for any previous year(s), and
will be applied in the order in which the taxes became due.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.09  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Interest and penalties.  All taxes imposed by this chapter, including
taxes withheld or required to be withheld from wages by an employer and
remaining unpaid after they have become due, shall bear interest on the amount
of the unpaid tax at the rate of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction of a month, and the taxpayers upon whom the taxes are
imposed, and the employers required by this chapter to deduct, withhold and pay
taxes imposed by this chapter shall be liable, in addition thereto, to a
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction of a
month of nonpayment, or $50, whichever is the greater. Any business which fails
to withhold taxes and/or file a completed return with the proper tax due shall
be assessed an additional $200. The Finance Director may abate interest or
penalties or both, and upon refusal to abate interest or penalties, or both, by
the Finance Director, the Board of Review may nevertheless abate interest or
penalties or both.
   (b)   Underpaying estimated taxes.  There is a charge for underpaying the
tax. When estimate tax payments are required, the penalty will attach when the
amount actually paid and the amount that should have been paid of the estimated
tax was less than 90% of the amount shown on the final return and did not equal
at least 100% of the previous year's liability. Failure to pay 80% of tax due
by February 28 of the following year will result in a penalty and interest
charge on the entire remaining tax balance.
   (c)   Returned check fee.  In addition to any other charges for interest
and/or penalties which may be applicable, a charge of up to $50 shall be added
to the tax due when any check in payment of taxes is returned unpaid by the
bank. This charge is to offset the cost of additional bookkeeping and
processing and is made irrespective of any charge which may be levied against
the maker by his or her bank. Notice by the Finance Director to the taxpayer
that a check has been returned unpaid is not required, nor is notice of the
above charge required. The tender of payment shall not be considered as
received as long as this charge has not been paid. Failure to replace the
dishonored check by a valid payment within 30 days from the date the city
received the unpaid check from the bank shall be considered cause for
prosecution.
   (d)   Exceptions.
      (1)   No penalty shall be assessed on additional taxes found during an
audit to be due when a return was timely filed in good faith and the tax paid
thereon within 30 days of notification.
      (2)   In the absence of fraud neither a penalty nor interest shall be
assessed on any additional taxes resulting from a federal audit for federal
income tax purposes, provided an amended return is filed and the additional tax
paid within three months after final determination of the federal tax
liability. Such amended returns shall be on a form obtainable on request from
the Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting (i.e.,
cash or accrual) or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing
the original return.
      (3)   A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting (i.e., cash or 
accrual) or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the
original return.
      (4)   A taxpayer or employer shall have 30 days after receipt of notice
of any proposed imposition of interest and penalties within which to file a
written protest or explanation with the Finance Director. If no protest or
explanation is filed within the prescribed time, the proposed imposition of
interest and penalties shall become and be the final assessment. Upon filing of
a written protest or explanation the Finance Director shall determine the
assessment, which may or may not be the same as the proposed assessment.
   (e)   Abatement.  Upon recommendation of the Finance Director, the Board of
Review may abate interest or penalties, or both, and upon appeal from the
refusal of the Finance Director to so recommend, the Board of Review may
nevertheless abate interest or penalty or both.
   (f)   Violations.
      (1)   The following shall be considered violations of this chapter:
         A.   Failing, neglecting or refusing to make any return or declaration
required by this chapter;
         B.   Making any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
         C.   Failing, neglecting or refusing to pay the tax, penalties or
interest imposed by this chapter;
         D.   Failing, neglecting or refusing to withhold the tax from
employees or to remit the withholding to the Finance Director;
         E.   Refusing to permit the Finance Director or any duly authorized
agent or employee to examine books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
         F.   Failing to appear before the Finance Director and to produce
books, records, federal and state income tax returns, and papers relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer under order or subpoena of the Finance
Director;
         G.   Refusing to disclose to the Finance Director any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
         H.   Failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any
order or subpoena of the Finance Director authorized hereby;
         I.   Attempting to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter;
         J.   Giving to an employer false information as to his or her true
name, correct Social Security number and residence address, or failing to
promptly notify an employer of any change in residence address and the date
thereof;
         K.   Failing to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records
of employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and municipal tax withheld,
or to knowingly give the Finance Director false information.
      (2)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provided in §
880.99.
   (g)   Limitations on prosecution.
      (1)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and
interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within three years after
the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later.
      (2)   Prosecutions under this chapter shall be commenced within three
years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud,
failure to file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to
be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the
commission of the offense.
   (h)   Failure to receive forms no excuse.  The failure of any employer or
person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other required form shall
not excuse him or her from making any informational return, return or
declaration, filing a form or paying the tax.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 49-2005, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.10  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the city but who receives income,
wages, salaries, commissions or other compensation for work done or services
performed or rendered outside of the city, if it be made to appear that he or
she has paid a municipal income tax on the income, wages, salaries, commissions
or other compensation to another municipality, shall be allowed a credit
against the tax imposed by this chapter of the amount so paid by him or her or
in his or her behalf to the other municipality. For the tax year 2015 and
forward, the credit shall not exceed 67% of the tax assessed by this chapter.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 22-2014, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 880.11  OTHER PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Records to be kept by taxpayers.  Employers and other taxpayers
subject to the tax under this chapter are required to keep such records as will
enable the filing of true and accurate returns, whether of taxes withheld at
the source or of taxes payable upon income or net profits, or both, and such
records are to be preserved to enable the Finance Director, or any agent or
employee of the Finance Director, to verify the correctness of the returns
filed. Such records shall be kept for a period of six years.
   (b)   Allocation of funds; 1.25% income tax. 
      A.   Generally. The allocation of funds collected by virtue of the
municipal income tax of the city shall be as follows. 
      B.   One and one quarter percent income tax. The funds collected under
the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the City Income Tax Fund,
and the funds shall be disbursed in the following order, to wit:
         1.   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes at the cost of administering and enforcing the provisions
thereof shall be kept within the Income Tax Fund for the costs.
         2.   Not more than 95% of the net available income tax received
annually may be transferred from time to time to the General Fund and be used
to defray operating expenses of the city.
         3.   At least 5% of net available income tax receipts received
annually from time to time shall be transferred to the Capital Improvements
Fund and used for capital improvements for the city, including but not limited
to development and construction of sewers and street improvements, street
materials (for repair or replacement), for all city-owned buildings, parks,
playgrounds, and for equipment necessary for the Police, Fire, Safety, Street
and Traffic Departments. A one-time exception shall be for fiscal year 2014
reducing the percent of transfer to zero percent (0%).
   (c)   Identification required.  Agents and employees charged with the duty
of inspection or auditing of reports of employers and taxpayers will carry
proper identification, which shall be subject to examination by any person
whose records are sought to be examined.
   (d)   Savings clause.  If any sentence, clause, section or part of this
chapter, or any tax against any individual or any of the several groups
specified herein, is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only the sentence,
clause, section or part of this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this
chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council of the city
that this chapter would have been adopted had the unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
   (e)   Offsets.
      (1)   Business losses cannot be offset against income, salaries, wages
and other compensation that represent employee income and/or other non-business
income.
         A.   If an individual operated more than one business, the profits of
which were subject to city income tax, the individual may offset profits from
one business with the net loss from another business, and report the resulting
net profit or loss for city income tax purposes.
         B.   In any event, the net loss on a business used to offset net
income from another business must exactly agree with the net loss as reported
on federal income tax return Form 1040, as filed with the federal government.
      (2)   If a net operating loss has been sustained in any taxable year,
such losses may not be carried forward or backward for any other taxable year.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 8-2014, passed 5-19-2014)
§ 880.12  FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Duties and authority of the Finance Director.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to receive the tax
imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed herein from the taxpayers; to
keep an accurate record thereof; and to report all moneys so received. All
cashiers handling tax moneys shall be subject directly to the Finance Director
and shall give daily accountings to the Finance Director.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce payment of
all taxes owing the city, to keep accurate records for a minimum of six years
showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration and/or
make any return, including taxes withheld, and to show the dates and amounts of
payments thereof.
      (3)   The Finance Director is hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and the enforcement of the rules and regulations of
the Council of the city relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
collection of the city income taxes and the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the examination and
correction of returns and payments.
      (4)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has
filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Finance
Director may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from the
taxpayer and shall send to the taxpayer a written statement showing the amount
of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any. A
taxpayer shall have 30 days after receipt of notice of any proposed imposition
of tax, interest and/or penalties within which to file a written protest or
explanation with the Finance Director. If no protest or explanation is filed
within the prescribed time, the proposed imposition of tax, interest and/or
penalties shall become and be the final assessment. Upon filing of a written
protest or explanation, the Finance Director shall determine the assessment,
which may or may not be the same as the proposed assessment.
      (5)   Subject to the consent of the Board of Review or pursuant to
regulations approved by the Council of the city, the Finance Director shall
have the power to compromise any interest or penalty, or both, imposed by this
chapter.
      (6)   A Department of Taxation is hereby created within the office of the
Finance Director. Such Department of Taxation shall have such deputies, clerks
and other employees as may from time to time be determined to be necessary by
the Council of the city, and shall receive such salary as may be determined by
City Council.  The Finance Director shall appoint personnel and purchase all
equipment, supplies and material for the Department of Taxation. The Department
of Taxation shall be charged with the administration and operation of this
chapter, under the direction of the Finance Director.  The Finance Director
shall prescribe the form and method of accounts and reports for that
Department, as well as the forms for taxpayer's returns and declarations, and
shall be charged with the internal examination and audit of all such accounts,
and shall exhibit accurate records showing the amount received from each
taxpayer and the date of the receipt. The Finance Director shall also make
written report to Council annually of all moneys collected hereunder during the
preceding year.
   (b)   Investigative powers of the Finance Director; penalty for divulging
confidential information.
      (1)   The Finance Director or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records, and
federal and state income tax returns of any employer, or of any taxpayer or
person subject to the tax, or believed to be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if
no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such employer, supposed
employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to
furnish to the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, within 30 days following a written request by the Finance Director or
his or her duly authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities, and
opportunity for making the examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
      (2)   The Finance Director, or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, is hereby authorized to examine any person, employer or employee
under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been returned for
taxation, and for this purpose may compel the production of books, federal and
state income tax records, papers and records and the attendance of all persons
before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, wherever he or she believes
the persons have knowledge of that income.
      (3)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to the examination by any employer
or persons subject or presumed to be subject to the tax by any officer, agent
or employee if a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any
order or subpoena of the Finance Director authorized hereby shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in §
880.09(f).
      (4)   Tax returns, investigations, hearings and all audit papers and
information connected therewith are confidential and shall be carefully
preserved so that they shall not be available for inspection by anyone other
than the proper agents of the city for official tax purposes.
   (c)   Penalty for divulging confidential information.  Any information
gained, as the result of the filing of any tax returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter, shall be
confidential, except for official tax purposes and except in accordance with
proper judicial order. Any person divulging such information shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine or penalty of not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than six
months, or both. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to the above penalties, any employee of the city who violates the
provisions of this section relative to disclosures of confidential information
shall be immediately dismissed from the service of the city.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.13  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   The Board of Review, consisting of three members, one to be appointed
by the Mayor, one to be appointed by the Finance Director, and the third to be
selected by the two so appointed, is created by this chapter. No member shall
be appointed to the Board of Review who holds other public office or
appointment with the city. All appointments are subject to confirmation by City
Council. The members of the Board of Review shall serve without pay.
   (b)   Appointment to the Board of Review shall serve as the following:
      (1)   First appointed will serve a one-year term. After one year is
completed, the person replacing this person will serve a term of three years.
      (2)   Second appointed will serve a two-year term. After the two years
have been completed, the person replacing this person will serve a term of
three years.
      (3)   Third appointed will serve a three-year term. After the three years
are completed, the person replacing this person will serve a term of three
years.
   (c)   A majority of the members of the Board of Review shall constitute a
quorum. The Board of Review shall adopt its own procedural rules and the Income
Tax Department will keep a record of all transactions.
   (d)   All hearings of the Board of Review shall be conducted privately and
in conjunction with the Income Tax Personnel. The provisions of §
880.12(b) with reference to the confidential character of information to be
disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before
the Board of Review on appeal.
   (e)   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Finance
Director which is made under the authority conferred by this chapter and the
rules and regulations related thereto may appeal therefrom to the Board of
Review within 30 days from the announcement of the ruling or decision by the
Finance Director, provided the taxpayer making the appeal has filed with the
city the required return or other documents concerning the obligation at issue.
The appeal shall be in writing and shall state why the decision should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful. The Board of Review shall, on hearing, have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any such ruling or decision, or any
part thereof. Such hearing shall be scheduled within 45 days from the date of
appeal, unless the taxpayer waives a hearing. The Board's ruling must be made
within 90 days from the date of the closing of the record, shall be in writing
and filed with the Finance Director, and within 15 days of its decision shall
send notice of its decision by ordinary mail to the taxpayer making the appeal.
   (f)   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Board of
Review may appeal therefrom to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days
from the announcement of the ruling or decision. For matters relating to tax
years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, any ruling or decision of the
Board of Appeal may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction or to the
State Board of Tax Appeals.
(Ord. 43-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 880.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months,
or both, for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, any
employee of the city who violates §
880.12(c), relative to the disclosure of confidential information, shall be
immediately dismissed from the service of the city.
CHAPTER 881:  EARNED INCOME TAX
REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
   
881.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
881.02   Definitions
   
881.03   Imposition of tax
   
881.04   Collection at source
   
881.05   Annual return; filing
   
881.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
881.07   Estimated taxes
   
881.08   Rounding of amounts
   
881.09   Requests for refunds
   
881.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
881.11   Amended returns
   
881.12   Limitations
   
881.13   Audits
   
881.14   Service of assessment
   
881.15   Administration of claims
   
881.16   Tax information confidential
   
881.17   Fraud
   
881.18   Interest and penalties
   
881.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
881.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
881.21   Board of Review
   
881.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
881.23   Rental and leased property
   
881.24   Savings clause
   
881.25   Collection of tax after termination of ordinance
   
881.26   Finance Director
   
881.27   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of
chapter
   
881.28   Definitions
   
881.29   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment
   
881.30   Certification of amounts to be paid municipal corporations
   
881.31   Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality
   
881.32   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds
   
881.33   Electronic filing
   
881.34   Consolidated returns
   
881.35   Failure to pay tax
   
881.36   Declaration of estimated taxes
   
881.37   Additional penalties
   
881.38   Assessments against taxpayer
   
881.39   Refund applications
   
881.40   Amended returns
   
881.41   Examination of records and other documents and persons
   
881.42   Credits
   
881.43   Reckless violations; penalties
   
881.99   Violations; penalties
Cross-reference:
   Power to levy income tax, see
Charter § 1
Statutory reference:
   Municipal income taxes, see R.C. Ch. 718
   Payroll deductions, see R.C. § 9.42
§ 881.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension, and enlargement of municipal services
and facilities and capital improvements, Shelby hereby levies an annual
municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions, and other
compensation and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%).  The tax is levied at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or
earning or receiving income in Shelby.  The tax is levied on income, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation and on net profits as hereinafter
provided in §
881.03 of this chapter and other sections as they may apply.
   (c)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter
881 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution.  The
tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended
to be consistent with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code
Chapter 718 (R.C. Chapter 718).  This chapter is effective for tax years
beginning on and after January 1, 2016.  Municipal taxable years beginning on
or before December 31, 2015, are subject to the income tax ordinance and
amendments thereto, and rules and regulations and amendments thereto, as they
existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   “Adjusted federal taxable income,” for a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under division (c)(24)D. of this section, means a C corporation’s
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in § 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)D.2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in § 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (c)(1)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in § 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         H.   1.   a.   Except as limited by divisions (c)(1)H.2., 3., and 4.
of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a
taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
               b.   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted
from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to
reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of
the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive
taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in
no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (c)(1)H.
of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (c)(1)H.1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by division (c)(1)H.1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
division (c)(1)H. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section
is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year
beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division
(c)(1)H.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.05(v)(3)B.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.05(v)(3)B.
      If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that
has made an election described in division (c)(49)B. of this section, is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(c)(24)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute
adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury
regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement
plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
      Nothing in division (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   A.   “Assessment” means a written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest,
or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation
that commences the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Board
of Review pursuant to §
881.21, and has “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         B.   “Assessment” does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
881.09(c)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (c)(2)A. of this
section.
      (3)   “Audit” means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   “Board of Review” means the board constituted to hear appeals of
municipal income tax matters, which is the entity created under §
881.21.
      (5)   “Calendar quarter” means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   “Casino operator” and “casino facility” have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   “Certified mail,” “express mail,” “United States mail,” “postal
service,” and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
R.C. § 5703.056.
      (8)   “Disregarded entity” means a single member limited liability
company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the
company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax
purposes.
      (9)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer
and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.  A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   “Employee” means an individual who is an employee for federal
income tax purposes.
      (11)   “Employer” means a person that is an employer for federal income
tax purposes.
      (12)   “Exempt income” means all of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard of any state.
         B.   Intangible income.
         C.   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (c)(12)C. of this section,
“unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         E.   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations;
         G.   Alimony and child support received.
         H.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30.  Division (c)(12)I. of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (c)(35) of this section.
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         N.   An S corporation shareholder’s share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from
self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         O.   All of the income of individuals or a class of individuals under
18 years of age.
         P.   1.   Except as provided in divisions (c)(12)P.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
881.04(c)(2) or (c)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for Shelby under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
881.04(c)(4)B.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
881.04(c)(2), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
881.04(c)(5), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed
location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (c)(12)P.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         Q.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(12)Q.2. or Q.3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in Shelby on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)Q.1. of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (c)
(12)Q.2.b. of this section, “professional athlete,” “professional entertainer,”
and “public figure” have the same meanings as in §
881.04(c).
            3.   Compensation to which division (c)(12)Q. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (c)(12)Q. of this section, “base of
operation” means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         R.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         S.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
      Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (c) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity’s income.
      (13)   “Form 2106” means Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   “Generic form” means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim.
      (15)   “Gross receipts” means the total revenue derived from sales, work
done, or service rendered.
      (16)   “Income” means the following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (c)(24)D. of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (c)(16)A.1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (c)(16)A.4. of this section;
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that
is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to
reduce the entity’s net profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (c)(16)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’ shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (c)(12)N. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      (17)   “Intangible income” means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in
real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies,
and appreciation on deferred compensation. “Intangible income” does not include
prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling
winnings, or other similar games of chance.
      (18)   “Internal Revenue Code” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   “Limited liability company” means a limited liability company
formed under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   “Municipal corporation” includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   A.   “Municipal taxable income” means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to Shelby under §
881.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for Shelby.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of Shelby, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of Shelby, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
881.03, then reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for Shelby.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (c)(21)A.2.a. or
(c)(21)B. of this section, the amount of the individual’s employee business
expenses reported on the individual’s form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses
allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent the expenses do
not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that
nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   “Municipality” means the same as the City of Shelby.  If the terms
are capitalized in the ordinance they are referring to Shelby.
      (23)   “Net operating loss” means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. “Net operating loss” does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (24)   A.   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
         B.   “Net profit” for a person who is an individual means the
individual’s net profit required to
be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or schedule F reduced by any net
operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of division (c)(24)B. of this
section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (c)(1)H. of this section.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(c)(24)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         D.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by Shelby, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for Shelby.  The election
shall be made on the annual return for Shelby.  Shelby will treat the publicly
traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   “Nonresident” means an individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   “Ohio Business Gateway” means the online computer network system,
created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   “Other payer” means any person, other than an individual’s
employer or the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual. “Other payer” includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   “Pass-through entity” means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through entity” does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   “Pension” means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. 
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   “Person” includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   “Postal service” means the United States Postal Service.
      (32)   “Postmark date,” “date of postmark,” and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      (33)   A.   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the
municipal corporation that was adopted by the municipal corporation before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such municipal corporation in future taxable years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   “Publicly traded partnership” means any partnership, an interest
in which is regularly traded on an established securities market.  A “publicly
traded partnership” may have any number of partners.
      (35)   “Qualifying wages” means wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, the exercise of a stock option, or other disposition
of a stock option.  Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies only to those
amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in § 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Division
(c)(35)B.3. of this section applies only to employee contributions and employee
deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (c)(35)B. of this section or §
880.04, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   “Related entity” means any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (c)(36)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding
stock;
         D.   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (c)(36)A. to (c)(36)C. of this section have been met.
      (37)   “Related member” means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining
whether a person is a related member under this division, “twenty percent
(20%)” shall be substituted for “five percent (5%)” wherever “five percent
(5%)” appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   “Resident” means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
881.03(e).
      (39)   “S corporation” means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (40)   “Schedule C” means Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   “Schedule E” means Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   “Schedule F” means Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   “Single member limited liability company” means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.
      (44)   “Shelby” means the municipality Shelby, Ohio.
      (45)   “Small employer” means any employer that had total revenue of less
than $500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
“total revenue” means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer” does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (46)   “Tax Administrator” means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by Shelby in
accordance with this chapter.  The title for this individual is “Director of
Finance and Public Record of the City of Shelby, Ohio.”
      (47)   “Tax return preparer” means any individual described in § 7701(a)
(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (48)   “Taxable year” means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (49)   A.   “Taxpayer” means a person subject to a tax levied on income
by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. “Taxpayer” does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (c)(49)B.1. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (c)(49)B.1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (50)   “Taxpayers’ rights and responsibilities” means the rights provided
to taxpayers in §§
881.09,
881.12,
881.13,
881.19(b),
881.20,
881.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by Shelby for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      (51)   “Video lottery terminal” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3770.21.
      (52)   “Video lottery terminal sales agent” means a lottery sales agent
licensed under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf
of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (a)   The income tax levied by Shelby at a rate of 1.5% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in Shelby.
   (b)   Individuals.  For residents of Shelby, the income tax levied herein
shall be on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other
compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including
the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities
owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the
resident.  This is further detailed in the definition of income (§
881.02(c)(16)).
   (c)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the
nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
   (d)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to “municipal
taxable income” as defined in §
881.02(c)(21).  Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
881.02(c)(12).
   (e)   Domicile.
      (1)   A.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in Shelby for all or
part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in Shelby on the last
day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax Administrator
reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in Shelby for all or part
of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (e)(1)A. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in Shelby
for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in Shelby for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         B.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         C.   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         D.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         E.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         F.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         G.   The primary location at which the individual is employed.
         H.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         I.   The number of contact periods the individual has with Shelby. For
the purposes of this division, an individual has one “contact period” with
Shelby if the individual is away overnight from the individual’s abode located
outside of Shelby and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some
portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in Shelby.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
   (f)   Businesses.  This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a
business or profession in Shelby, unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in Shelby or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of Shelby shall be considered as having a taxable situs in Shelby
for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average
ratio of the following:
         A.   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in Shelby during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the
real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
            2.   As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
         B.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in Shelby to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the
individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes
are not required to be withheld under §
881.04(c);
         C.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in Shelby to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   A.   If the apportionment factors described in division (f)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in Shelby, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of
Shelby may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion
of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving
one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         B.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
881.12(a).
         C.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (f)(2)A. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
881.12(a).
         D.   Nothing in division (f)(2) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (f)(1)B. of this section, “wages, salaries, and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         A.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (f)(3)A.2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         B.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         C.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (f)(3)A. or (f)(3)B. of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (f)(1)C. of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:
         A.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in Shelby if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within Shelby from a
stock of goods located within Shelby.
            2.   The property is delivered within Shelby from a location
outside Shelby, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within Shelby and the sales
result from such solicitation or promotion.
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within Shelby to
purchasers outside Shelby, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
         B.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
Shelby to the extent that such services are performed in Shelby.
         C.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in Shelby shall be sitused to Shelby.
         D.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in Shelby shall be sitused to Shelby.
         E.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to Shelby based upon the extent to which the tangible
personal property is used in Shelby.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to Shelby’s tax only if the property
generating the net profit is located in Shelby or if the individual taxpayer
that receives the net profit is a resident of Shelby.  Shelby shall allow such
taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating
net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation in which
the property is located.
      (6)   A.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to Shelby, if applicable,
based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in Shelby to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
         B.   An individual who is a resident of Shelby shall report the
individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return for Shelby. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under Shelby’s income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (f)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (f)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.04  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   Withholding provisions.  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer located or doing business in Shelby shall withhold an income tax from the
qualifying wages earned and/or received by each employee in Shelby.  Except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
881.03 or division (b)(4) or (b)(6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in §
881.01(b) of this chapter, of 1.5%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that
the employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively
pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit
of, the employee.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of Shelby the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld
or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
         A.   1.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of Shelby in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of Shelby in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded $200.
            2.   Payment under division (b)(1)A. of this section shall be made
so that the payment is postmarked to the Tax Administrator not later than 15
days after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
         B.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (b)(1)A. of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter.
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the payment and
subsequent payments, based on the Tax Administrator’s determination, may be
required to be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of
all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of Shelby. The payment of tax by
electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer’s,
agent’s, or other payer’s obligation to file any return as required under this
section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and Shelby as the return
required of an non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold Shelby income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
      (5)   A.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         B.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to Shelby the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
Shelby income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for Shelby until such time as the withheld amount
is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         A.   The names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for Shelby during the preceding calendar year;
         B.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         C.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         D.   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee;
         E.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold Shelby income tax
on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under
the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   (c)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   “Employer” includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         B.   “Fixed location” means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
         C.   “Principal place of work” means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s
employer.
            1.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (c)(2)A.1. of this section among those two
or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            2.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (c)(2)B. of this section, except that “location” shall be substituted
for “municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division.
         D.   “Professional athlete” means an athlete who performs services in
a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         E.   “Professional entertainer” means a person who performs services
in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-
event basis.
         F.   “Public figure” means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         G.   “Worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   A.   Subject to divisions (c)(3), (5), and (6) of this section, an
employer is not required to withhold Shelby income tax on qualifying wages paid
to an employee for the performance of personal services in Shelby if the
employee performed such services in Shelby on 20 or fewer days in a calendar
year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in Shelby.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in Shelby. For the purposes of this division, “presumed
worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary worksite in
Shelby at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days” if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of Shelby and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided in
this §
881.04.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         B.   For the purposes of division (c)(2)A. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in Shelby
only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of
the employer in Shelby than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For
the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (c)
(2)B.3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (c)(2)A. of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages described in
that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)B. of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in Shelby exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to Shelby for any subsequent days in that calendar year
on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in Shelby.
         B.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for Shelby under
division (c)(4)A. of this section may elect to withhold tax for Shelby for the
first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in Shelby.
      (5)   A.   If an employer’s fixed location is Shelby and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
881.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee’s qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to
Shelby, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of Shelby.
         B.   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer
for a taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (c)(2)A. and (c)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that the Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of this §
881.04.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 34-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 881.05  ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (a)   An annual Shelby income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not
an individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
881.04 of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income
subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due Shelby.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for Shelby income tax
purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.  The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired.  The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to Shelby, at which time the retiree
shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by Shelby, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (e)   Shelby shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer.  The return shall
include the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return, and amended return, copies of the
following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form W-2,
“Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information reported on the taxpayer’s
federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         B.   Should Shelby have the ability to receive documents filed
electronically, a taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to
the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is
available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by Shelby to determine and verify the taxpayer’s municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (f) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to Shelby.  No remittance is required if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer’s taxable year.  The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to Shelby.  No remittance is required if
the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Shelby’s income tax
return. The extended due date of Shelby’s income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division is
not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator
grants an extension of that date.
         A.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of Shelby’s income tax return.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer’s Shelby income tax return.  If
the request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the
Shelby income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the
taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (3)   If the state Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date
for filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Shelby’s income tax
return. The extended due date of Shelby’s income tax return shall be the same
as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by Shelby, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this division (g) of this
section conflicts with any provision in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) of this
section, the provisions in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) prevail.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, Shelby shall not require
a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount due is
$10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to Shelby for a taxable year
pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section shall file with Shelby an annual
net profit return under division (f)(3) of this section.
   (i)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made on the date of the timestamp assigned by the
electronic system receiving that payment. This division shall not apply to
payments required to be made under §
881.04(b)(1)A. or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
   (j)   Taxes withheld for Shelby by an employer, the agent of an employer, or
other payer as described in §
881.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by Shelby, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to Shelby and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by Shelby to be filed in accordance with this
division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by Shelby, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by Shelby
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of Shelby’s ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (m)   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
      (1)   Should Shelby have the ability to receive documents filed
electronically, any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file Shelby’s
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway should Shelby
have the ability to receive documents filed electronically.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (n)   Extension for service in or for the Armed Forces.  Each member of the
National Guard of any state and each member of a reserve component of the Armed
Forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to an executive
order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of
the United States, and each civilian serving as support personnel in a combat
zone or contingency operation in support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the
Tax Administrator of Shelby for both an extension of time for filing of the
return and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by Shelby during
the period of the member’s or civilian’s duty service, and for 180 days
thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred
eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant
shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to
demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (o)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate. 
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division are not
delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to Shelby before the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (o)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (p)   (1)   Nothing in this division (p) denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (n) and (o) of this section.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by Shelby in accordance with this
chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (p)(2)A. of this
section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this division,
“qualifying taxpayer” means a member of the National Guard or a member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces.
         B.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (p)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (q)   For each taxable year to which division (n), (o), or (p) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (o)(2) and (o)(3) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (r)   Consolidated municipal income tax return.  As used in this section:
      (1)   “Affiliated group of corporations” means an affiliated group as
defined in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   “Consolidated federal income tax return” means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   “Consolidated federal taxable income” means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (r)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   “Incumbent local exchange carrier” has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4927.01.
      (5)   “Local exchange telephone service” has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.
   (s)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to Shelby’s
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (s)(2) of this section
or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (s)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (s)(1) or (s)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
   (t)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated Shelby income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to Shelby. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated Shelby
income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated Shelby income
tax return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (u)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated Shelby income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (v)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (v)(2), (v)(3), and
(v)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
881.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated Shelby income tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under §
881.02(c)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated Shelby income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to Shelby. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall
be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net
profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to Shelby. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall
not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s
net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the
affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to Shelby;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to Shelby income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (w)   Corporations filing a consolidated Shelby income tax return shall make
the computations required under divisions (r) through (y) of this section by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
   (x)   Each corporation filing a consolidated Shelby income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by Shelby in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with Shelby before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated or
combined tax return with Shelby may continue to file consolidated or combined
tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years
beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 34-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 881.06  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in Shelby who is required to and
does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter, may claim a
nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed by this chapter upon satisfactory
evidence that tax has been paid to another municipality.  Subject to division
(c) of this section, the credit shall not exceed 0.75% of the amount obtained
by multiplying the income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other
compensation subject to tax in the other municipality, or 0.75% of the amount
subject to tax by Shelby, whichever is the lesser.  This is effective for tax
year 2019 and forward.
   (b)   Shelby shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident of
Shelby who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C. §
715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. § 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation.
   (c)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (a) of this section, “the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation” subject to
tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by
dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for
that municipality.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 28-2018, passed 11-19-2018)
§ 881.07  ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Estimated taxes” means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for Shelby’s income tax for the
current taxable year.
      (2)   “Tax liability” means the total taxes due to Shelby for the taxable
year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after
applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another
taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld for Shelby from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to Shelby in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, “date of
the postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
881.05(g) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to Shelby, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
881.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
881.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with Shelby under §
881.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in Shelby but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.08  ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.09  REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as in
§
881.18.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by Shelby:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount payment. Except as
provided in division (c)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall issue
an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially
denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied,
the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If the Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
881.21.
   (d)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (c) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (e)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
881.18(a)(4).
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.10  SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR
REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited with Shelby, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by Shelby as a refund but is
subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (b)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with Shelby is subject to recovery by Shelby.  If Shelby’s
tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund of the
tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, Shelby shall allow a
nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding Shelby claims is due with
respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to the
first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (c)   If Shelby’s tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using Shelby’s
tax rate.  However, if Shelby’s tax rate is greater than the tax rate in the
other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable credit is to be
paid to Shelby, along with any penalty and interest that accrued during the
period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.11  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   If a taxpayer’s tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
Shelby changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state
income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with Shelby. The
amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return only:
         A.   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         B.   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
881.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (d) of this
section for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by Shelby. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
881.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.  All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (d)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s Shelby’s tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended Shelby return showing income subject to Shelby
income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional Shelby income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.12  LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral period” means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Review the request described in §
881.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Review did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Review, the sixtieth day after
the date on which the final determination of the Board of Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
881.09.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by Shelby does not prejudice any claim
for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Review, of the Ohio Board of
Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
881.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
881.09(e).
   (e)   No civil action to recover Shelby income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; or
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.13  AUDITS.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (1)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      (2)   This division (c) does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.14  SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Last known address” means the address the Tax Administrator has at
the time a document is originally sent by certified mail or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   “Undeliverable address” means an address to which the postal
service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to
deliver an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-
delivery is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the
assessment.
   (b)   Subject to division (c) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. 
With the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax
Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided
in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic
mail.
   (c)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a
new last known address, including the use of a change of address service
offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. §
5703.056. If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known
address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served.
If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the
assessment’s postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other Shelby official or the
designee of either serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment is
directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(c)(1)A. of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and
that the assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by the Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
   “This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date.”
      (3)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address,
the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
      (4)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (c)
(1)A. of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division in accordance with division (d) of this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (c) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (d)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other Shelby
official or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the local Board of Review.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by personal service.
   (f)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (c)(1)B. of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (g)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.15  ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “claim” means a claim for an amount payable
to Shelby that arises pursuant to Shelby’s income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of Shelby:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.16  TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person’s official duties or the official business of Shelby as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit Shelby from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.17  FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by Shelby ordinance or state law to
be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud Shelby or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.18  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Applicable law” means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by Shelby provided they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of Shelby.
      (2)   “Federal short-term rate” means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   “Income tax,” “estimated income tax,” and “withholding tax” mean
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by Shelby
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   “Interest rate as described in division (a) of this section” means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   “Return” includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or Shelby by
a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   “Unpaid estimated income tax” means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   “Unpaid income tax” means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   “Unpaid withholding tax” means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   “Withholding tax” includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to Shelby on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
Shelby to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with Shelby any return required to be filed, the following penalties and
interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (a) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, Shelby may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, Shelby may impose a
penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
Shelby may impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction
thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability
shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires Shelby to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that Shelby has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of Shelby to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By October 31 of each year Shelby shall publish the rate described in
division (a) of this section applicable to the next succeeding calendar year.
   (g)   Shelby may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer Shelby’s post-judgment collection costs and fees,
including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.19  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR AND FINANCE DIRECTOR; VERIFICATION OF
INFORMATION.
   (a)   Authority.  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   A.   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns; to examine persons under oath; to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony; to take depositions; to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt; to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses; and to administer oaths.
         B.   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under Shelby’s income
tax ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
881.03;
      (7)   A.   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         B.   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator and/or Finance Director shall not
review, re-determine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation,
or order which the Tax Administrator and/or Finance Director has made, unless
such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is
dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and/or
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
881.04.
   (b)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject
to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by Shelby or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (c)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person’s Social Security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
881.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
881.99.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (c) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
881.18.
         C.   The penalties provided for under divisions (c)(2)A. and (c)(2)B.
of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
881.99 for a violation of §
881.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.20  REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (c)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (d)   The Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.  Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the tax administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (f)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.21  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The Board of Review shall consist of three members who are
resident electors of the City of Shelby. Two members shall be appointed by the
legislative authority of Shelby, but such appointees may not be employees,
elected officials, or contractors with Shelby at any time during their term or
in the five years (which applies only to these two appointments) immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor
of Shelby. This member may be an employee of Shelby, but may not be the
Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other
similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or
any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Review Shelby shall be two
years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the
member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed
by the Mayor of Shelby shall serve at the discretion of the administrative
official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Review who, for any reason, ceases to meet
the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Review
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or Mayor that appointed the member shall appoint another
individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Review in the member’s place.
The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to the same requirements
and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever the Finance Director issues an assessment, the Finance
Director shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Review by filing a request with the Board of Review. The
request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days
after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c) of this section,
unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If
the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the
Board of Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public
accountant, or other representative. The Board of Review may allow a hearing to
be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing
must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board of Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Finance
Director’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Review shall
issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board of
Review’s final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Finance
Director may appeal the Board of Review’s final determination as provided in
R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The Board of Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules
governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such
records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. 
Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Review created pursuant to
this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.22  AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of Shelby,
or the Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Administrator by
resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed by
Shelby in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with or
be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.23  RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (a)   All property owners of real property located in Shelby, who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly
authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real
property in Shelby.  The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, is
authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in Shelby. 
The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the production
of papers and records and the attendance of all personal before him, whether as
parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real property
in Shelby.
   (c)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
881.99 of this chapter:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (a) hereof;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (a) hereof;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.24  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for.  Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.25  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
881.12 and
881.99 hereof.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
881.05 and
881.04 of this chapter as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.26  FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Duties and authority of the Finance Director.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to receive the tax
imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed herein from the taxpayers; to
keep an accurate record thereof; and to report all moneys so received. All
employees handling tax moneys shall be subject directly to the Finance Director
and shall give daily accountings to the Finance Director.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce payment of
all taxes owing the city, to keep accurate records for a minimum of six years
showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration and/or
make any return, including taxes withheld, and to show the dates and amounts of
payments thereof.
      (3)   The Finance Director is hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and the enforcement of the rules and regulations of
the Council of the city relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
collection of the city income taxes and the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the examination and
correction of returns and payments.
      (4)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has
filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Finance
Director may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from the
taxpayer and shall send to the taxpayer a written statement showing the amount
of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any. A
taxpayer shall have 30 days after receipt of notice of any proposed imposition
of tax, interest and/or penalties within which to file a written protest or
explanation with the Finance Director. If no protest or explanation is filed
within the prescribed time, the proposed imposition of tax, interest and/or
penalties shall become and be the final assessment. Upon filing of a written
protest or explanation, the Finance Director shall determine the assessment,
which may or may not be the same as the proposed assessment.
      (5)   Subject to the consent of the Board of Review or pursuant to
regulations approved by the Council of the city, the Finance Director shall
have the power to compromise any interest or penalty, or both, imposed by this
chapter.
      (6)   A Department of Taxation is hereby created within the office of the
Finance Director. Such Department of Taxation shall have such deputies, clerks
and other employees as may from time to time be determined to be necessary by
the Council of the city, and shall receive such salary as may be determined by
City Council.  The Finance Director shall appoint personnel and purchase all
equipment, supplies, and material for the Department of Taxation. The
Department of Taxation shall be charged with the administration and operation
of this chapter, under the direction of the Finance Director.  The Finance
Director shall prescribe the form and method of accounts and reports for that
Department, as well as the forms for taxpayer’s returns and declarations, shall
be charged with the internal examination and audit of all such accounts, and
shall exhibit accurate records showing the amount received from each taxpayer
and the date of the receipt. The Finance Director shall also make written
report to Council annually of all moneys collected hereunder during the
preceding year.
   (b)   Investigative powers of the Finance Director; penalty for divulging
confidential information.
      (1)   The Finance Director, or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records, and
federal and state income tax returns of any employer, or of any taxpayer or
person subject to the tax, or believed to be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if
no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such employer, supposed
employer, taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to
furnish to the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, within 30 days following a written request by the Finance Director or
his or her duly authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities, and
opportunity for making the examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
      (2)   The Finance Director, or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, is hereby authorized to examine any person, employer or employee
under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been returned for
taxation, and for this purpose may compel the production of books, federal and
state income tax records, papers, and records and the attendance of all persons
before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, wherever he or she believes
the persons have knowledge of that income.
      (3)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to the examination by any employer
or persons subject or presumed to be subject to the tax by any officer, agent
or employee if a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any
order or subpoena of the Finance Director authorized hereby shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in §
881.99.
      (4)   Tax returns, investigations, hearings, and all audit papers and
information connected therewith are confidential and shall be carefully
preserved so that they shall not be available for inspection by anyone other
than the proper agents of the city for official tax purposes.
   (c)   Penalty for divulging confidential information.  Any information
gained, as the result of the filing of any tax returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter, shall be
confidential, except for official tax purposes and except in accordance with
proper judicial order. Any person divulging such information shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding six months, or both. Each disclosure shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, any employee of the
city who violates the provisions of this section relative to disclosures of
confidential information shall be subject to immediate dismissal from the
service of the city.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 881.27  FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF
CHAPTER.
   (a)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to §§
881.27 to
881.43 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's
election, both of the following shall apply:
      (1)   The Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator of each
municipal income tax for which the taxpayer is liable for the term of the
election;
      (2)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to §§
881.27 to
881.43 and any applicable provision of R.C. Chapter 5703.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year
by notifying the Tax Commissioner and each municipal corporation in which the
taxpayer conducted business during the previous taxable year, on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   A.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and each municipal corporation
in which the taxpayer conducted business during the previous taxable year of
its termination of the election.
         B.   A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed
by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any
taxable year.
         C.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer
is no longer subject to §§
881.27 to
881.43, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of
this chapter.
   (c)   (1)   A.   On or before the 31st day of January each year, each
municipal corporation imposing a tax on income shall certify to the Tax
Commissioner the rate of the tax in effect on the first day of January of that
year.
         B.   If, after the 31st day of January of any year, the electors of a
municipal corporation approve an increase in the rate of the municipal
corporation's tax on income that takes effect within that year, the municipal
corporation shall certify to the Tax Commissioner the new rate of tax not less
than 60 days before the effective date of the increase, after which effective
date the Commissioner shall apply the increased rate.
      (2)   A municipal corporation, within 90 days of receiving a taxpayer's
notification of election under division (b) of this section, shall submit to
the Tax Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, the
following information regarding the taxpayer:
         A.   The amount of any net operating loss that the taxpayer is
entitled to carry forward to a future tax year;
         B.   The amount of any net operating loss carryforward utilized by the
taxpayer in prior years;
         C.   Any credits granted by the municipal corporation to which the
taxpayer is entitled, the amount of such credits, whether the credits may be
carried forward to future tax years, and, if the credits may be carried
forward, the duration of any such carryforward;
         D.   Any overpayments of tax that the taxpayer has elected to carry
forward to a subsequent tax year;
         E.   Any other information the municipal corporation deems relevant in
order to effectuate the Tax Commissioner's efficient administration of the tax
on the municipal corporation's behalf.
      (3)   If any municipal corporation fails to timely comply with divisions
(c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section, the Tax Commissioner shall notify the
Director of Budget and Management, who, upon receiving such notification, shall
withhold from each payment made to the municipal corporation under §
881.30 50% of the amount of the payment otherwise due to the municipal
corporation under that section. The Director shall compute the withholding on
the basis of the tax rate most recently certified to the Tax Commissioner until
the municipal corporation complies with divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section.
   (d)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer §§
881.27 to
881.43.  In addition to any other powers conferred upon the Tax Commissioner by
law, the Tax Commissioner may:
      (1)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
      (2)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to carry
out those sections;
      (3)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the
duties ismposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
   (e)   No tax administrator shall utilize §§
881.27 to
881.43 in the administrator's administration of a municipal income tax, and
those sections shall not be applied to any taxpayer that has not made the
election under this section.
   (f)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make any section of this
chapter, other than R.C. § 718.01 and §§
881.27 to
881.43, applicable to the Tax Commissioner's administration of a municipal
income tax or to any taxpayer that has made the election under this section.
   (g)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a tax administrator, as
that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.28  DEFINITIONS.
   If a term used in §§
881.27 to
881.43 that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term
in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall have
control over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined
in R.C. Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall
control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes
other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is
defined in both this section and R.C. § 718.01, the definition in this section
shall control for all uses of that term in §§
881.27 to
881.43.  As used in §§
881.27 to
881.43 only:
   (a)   "Municipal taxable income" means income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under §
881.29, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the municipal corporation.
   (b)   "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
as described in division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01, means a C corporation's
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (2)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (b)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(4)B. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   Division (b)(4)A. of this section does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income.
      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.
      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02.
      (8)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.
      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.34(e)(3)B.
      (10)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.34(e)(3)B.
         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity
that has made the election described in division (L)(2) of R.C. § 718.01, and
is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in
division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal
taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation,
except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in
consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under
section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury regulations.
Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with
respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health
insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance
for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or
former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
         Nothing in division (b) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self- employment tax.
   (c)   "Taxpayer" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
"taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. "Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees,
or trustees in bankruptcy when
such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer.
   (d)   "Tax return" or "return" means the notifications and reports required
to be filed pursuant to §§
881.27 to
881.43 for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes
declarations of estimated tax.
   (e)   "Taxable year" means the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§
881.27 to
881.43 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than
one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner may
prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that
has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes, for a
taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal income tax
purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer that
would otherwise have no taxable year.
   (f)   "Assessment" means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax
issued pursuant to §
881.38.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.29  APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in a municipal corporation and that has made the election under §
881.27.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, net
profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the municipal corporation for purposes of municipal income taxation in
the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipal corporation during the taxable period to the average original
cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the
taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated.
         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property
shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipal corporation to wages, salaries, and other
compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
R.C. § 718.011;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the municipal
corporation to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
a municipal corporation, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may
require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
881.38(a).
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
881.38(a).
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section, receipts from
sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal
corporation as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes,
the property meets either of the following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         B.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a
location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
   (e)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal
corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the
real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based
upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the
commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
   (f)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under divisions (C)(12) and (R)(1)(d) of R.C. § 718.01 by a municipal
corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit,
the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the
taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no
case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned
to that municipal corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the
employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock
option not exempted from taxation.
      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to
the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal
corporation under this section.
   (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.30  CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNTS TO BE PAID MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.
   (a)   On or before the last day of each month, the Tax Commissioner shall
certify to the Director of Budget and Management the amount to be paid to each
municipal corporation, based on amounts reported on annual returns and
declarations of estimated tax under §§
881.32 and
881.36, less any amounts previously distributed and net of any audit
adjustments made or refunds granted by the Commissioner, for the calender month
preceding the month in which the certification is made. Not later than the
fifth day of each month, the Director shall provide for payment of the amount
certified to each municipal corporation from the municipal income tax fund,
plus a pro rata share of any investment earnings accruing to the fund since the
previous payment under this section. Each municipal corporation's share of such
earnings shall equal the proportion that the municipal corporation's certified
tax payment is of the total taxes certified to all municipal corporations in
that quarter. All investment earnings on money in the municipal income tax fund
shall be credited to that fund.
   (b)   If the Tax Commissioner determines that the amount of tax paid by a
taxpayer and distributed to a municipal corporation under this section for a
taxable year exceeds the amount payable to that municipal corporation under §§
881.27 to
881.43 after accounting for amounts remitted with the annual return and as
estimated taxes, the Commissioner shall proceed according to divisions (A) and
(B) of R.C. § 5703.77.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.31  INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by §§
881.27 to
881.43 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except
for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
provided in R.C. § 4123.271 or 5703.21.  The Tax Commissioner may furnish the
Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns filed. This section does not
prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.
   (b)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall provide
each tax administrator with the following information for every taxpayer that
filed tax returns with the Commissioner under §§
881.27 to
881.43 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the municipal
corporation under this chapter for any prior year:
      (1)   The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer identification
number;
      (2)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to, the municipal corporation pursuant to §
881.29;
      (3)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized
by the taxpayer;
      (4)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year;
      (5)   The amount of any credit claimed under §
881.42.
   (c)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to municipal
corporations under §
881.30, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to each municipal corporation a
report stating the name and federal identification number of every taxpayer
that made estimated payments that are attributable to the municipal corporation
and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.
   (d)   Not later than the 31st day of January of each year, every municipal
corporation having taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
881.27 shall provide to the Tax Commissioner, in a format prescribed by the
Commissioner, the name and mailing address of up to two persons to whom the
municipal corporation requests that the Commissioner send the information
described in divisions (b) and (c) of this section. The Commissioner shall not
provide such information to any person other than a person who is designated to
receive the information under this section and who is employed by the municipal
corporation or by a tax administrator, as defined in R.C. § 718.01, that
administers the municipal corporation's income tax, except as may otherwise be
provided by law.
   (e)   (1)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules that further govern the
terms and conditions under which tax returns filed with the Commissioner under
this chapter, and any other information gained in the performance of the
Commissioner's duties prescribed by this chapter, shall be available for
inspection by properly authorized officers, employees, or agents of the
municipal corporations to which the taxpayer's net profit is apportioned under
§
881.29.
      (2)   As used in this division, "properly authorized officer, employee,
or agent" means an officer, employee, or agent of a municipal corporation who
is authorized by charter or ordinance of the municipal corporation to view or
possess information referred to in R.C. § 718.13.
   (f)   (1)   If, upon receiving the information described in §
881.39 or division (b) or (c) of this section, a municipal corporation
discovers that it has additional information in its possession that could
result in a change to a taxpayer's tax liability, the municipal corporation may
refer the taxpayer to the Tax Commissioner for an audit. Such referral shall be
made on a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall include any information
that forms the basis for the referral.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a referral under division (f)(1) of this section,
the Commissioner shall review the referral and may conduct an audit of the
taxpayer that is the subject of the referral based on the information in the
referral and any other relevant information available to the Commissioner.
      (3)   Nothing in division (f) of this section shall be construed as
forming the sole basis upon which the Commissioner may conduct an audit of a
taxpayer.
      (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a municipal corporation from
filing a writ of mandamus if the municipal corporation believes that the
Commissioner has violated the Commissioner's fiduciary duty as the
administrator of the tax levied by the municipal corporation.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.32  FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (a)   (1)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under §
881.36, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner
prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the 15th day of the fourth month
following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year.
      (2)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one calendar
year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute
the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with §§
881.28,
881.29, and, if applicable,
881.34 onto its annual return.
      (3)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State and
in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with the
tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.
   (b)   The Tax Commissioner shall immediately forward to the Treasurer of
State all amounts the Commissioner receives pursuant to §§
881.27 to
881.43.  The Treasurer shall credit 99.5% of such amounts to the Municipal
Income Tax Fund and the remainder to the Municipal Income Tax Administrative
Fund established under R.C. § 5745.03.
   (c)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a
declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with
each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the
Commissioner under §§
881.27 to
881.43, copies of any relevant documents or other information.
         B.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through
the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division
electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division on or before January 1, 2019.
      (3)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax.
   (d)   (1)   A.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension
for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a tax return with the Commissioner under this
section. The extended due date of the return shall be the 15th day of the 10th
month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that
the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives
the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the
Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request.
         C.   An extension of time to file under division (d)(1) of this
section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Commissioner grants an extension of that date.
      (2)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with R.C. § 718.04, the Commissioner may
require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided
in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual
returns.
   (e)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall
include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the
Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the
return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to
notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or
other person.
   (f)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a
tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.33  ELECTRONIC FILING.
   (a)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
881.27 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and
shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically,
either through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make
payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the
applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or
make the payments by nonelectronic means.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
      (1)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and
make payments by electronic means;
      (2)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.34  CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated
federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4927.01.
      (5)   "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to a tax
imposed in accordance with R.C. § 718.04 in that taxable year and if the
affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return
with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a
change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election
continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division
(b)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Commissioner. The Tax Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause
shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the
year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return election
period in effect under division (b)(1) of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under §
881.27, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (B)(1) or (2) of
R.C. § 718.06 is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the
five-year period.
      (5)   When an election made under §
881.27 is terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon
the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner
as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that
prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax
return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of
which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3), and
(e)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
881.28, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under §
881.28(b) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject
to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with
respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
881.29, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
881.29, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude
the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the
computations required in §
881.29, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
881.27 to
881.43 on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under §
881.29 by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to"
for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other
amounts applicable under §§
881.27 to
881.43 or R.C. Chapter 5703 to the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or
more members of such an affiliated group.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.35  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.
   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
881.27 fails to pay any tax as required under §§
881.27 to
881.43, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its
payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as
the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the
date an assessment is issued under §
881.38, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.36  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Combined tax liability" means the total amount of a taxpayer's
income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a
taxable year.
      (2)   "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, every
taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable
year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount payable as
estimated taxes is at least $200.00.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, a taxpayer
having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration under
rules prescribed by the Commissioner.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on or
before the 15th day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes subject to
tax for the first time.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
   (c)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and
remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the amounts
prescribed in division (c)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made
payable to the Treasurer of State.
      (1)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month of the taxable year,
90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes
will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year,
the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   A.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
         B.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section,
the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the Treasurer of
State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in §
881.32(b).
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall
be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment,
unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e)
of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently due.
      (3)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
881.27 to
881.43 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in
accordance with §
881.30.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for
that year.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.37  ADDITIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§
881.27 to
881.43 or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply:
      (1)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
881.27 to
881.43 fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including
any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty not exceeding $25.00 per month or fraction of a month, for
each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including
extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The
aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not exceed $150.00.
      (2)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under §§
881.27 to
881.43 fails to do so, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the
following:
         A.   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the amount required to
be reported on the return;
         B.   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10% of the amount
required to be reported on the return.
      (3)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
881.27 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this
chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not
timely paid.
      (4)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by §§
881.27 to
881.43 that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness
of the return may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates
that the return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in
that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a
desire that is apparent from the return to delay or impede the administration
of §§
881.27 to
881.43, a penalty of up to $500.00 may be imposed.
      (5)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or
payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under §§
881.27 to
881.43, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of
the tax required to be shown on the return.
      (6)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under
§
881.39, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of
the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the
claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed
under §
881.38 without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by
division (a) of that section.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
   (c)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may
adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
   (d)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes
collected under §§
881.27 to
881.43 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the
same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed
to such municipal corporations under §
881.30.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.38  ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER.
   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§
881.27 to
881.43 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect
return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered
by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer
for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based
upon any information in the Commissioner's possession.
      The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a
taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return subject
to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was filed. Such
time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the Commissioner consent in
writing to the extension. Any such extension shall extend the three-year time
limit in §
881.39 for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an
assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment
as required by §§
881.27 to
881.43, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the
taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in R.C. §
5703.37.  With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on how
to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition.
   (b)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within 60
days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by
certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. §
5703.60.
   (c)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment
remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the Tax
Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of
the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has
an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the
taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin County.
      Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a
judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special
judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other
judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax
Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
      If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days after the
day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of tax
due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from
the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid or
until it is certified to the Attorney General for collection under R.C. §
131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is
certified to the Attorney General for collection, the entire unpaid portion of
the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its
entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be
collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
   (d)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
Municipal Income Tax Fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
   (e)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are
instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the
jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the
court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (c) of this section.
Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or
the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in R.C. § 5703.37
within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount
assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a
petition for reassessment in accordance with division (b) of this section and
provides security in a form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in an amount
sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial
payment of the assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner's consideration
of the petition for reassessment.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending,
the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of State does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition.
      If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is
corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a
decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the determination or
decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the
corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to
the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of
the overpayment as provided by §
881.39, with interest on that amount as provided by that section.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.39  REFUND APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under §§
881.27 to
881.43, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax Commissioner within
three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of
the tax, or within any additional period allowed by §
881.38(a).The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner.
   (b)   (1)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than $10.00 and not less than that
claimed, the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of Budget
and Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax refund fund
created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10.00 but less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner
shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer
attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the
municipal corporation's next distribution under §
881.30.
   (c)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (b) of this section
that is not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear interest
at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the 91st day after such
determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal or
erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of
payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid
or credited.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.40  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in
an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
881.27 and used to determine the tax due under §§
881.27 to
881.43 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal
income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue
Service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability under those
sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Commissioner
in such form as the Commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed
not later than 60 days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally
determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal income tax
deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been
assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an
amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of
return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's
consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the
Commissioner before filing the amended return.
   (b)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under §
881.38 for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section,
together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return.
   (c)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed
under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for filing the amended
return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in §
881.39, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that
section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in
§
881.39.  The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations,
or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.41  EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS.
   (a)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may
examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of
any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§
881.27 to
881.43 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections.
Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee
thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to
investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that
is subject to §§
881.27 to
881.43 shall be open to the Tax Commissioner's inspection during business hours
and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the
taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner,
in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order
requires that they be kept longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by
notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Commissioner
determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the
extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to
attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and
federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person
may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other
tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not
authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.42  CREDITS.
   (a)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of a municipal
corporation pursuant to R.C. § 718.15 or 718.151, shall be available to a
taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
881.27, against the municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal
corporation shall submit the following information to the Tax Commissioner on
or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the 31st day of January of the
first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:
      (1)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the municipal corporation
and taxpayer under R.C. § 718.15 or 718.151;
      (2)   A copy of the municipal ordinance or resolution authorizing the
agreement entered into between the municipal corporation and the taxpayer.
   (b)   (1)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the municipal corporation
granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the
credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the
tax year to which the credit is to be applied.
      (2)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by a municipal corporation and taxpayer under R.C. § 718.15 or 718.151, or
to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.43  RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, whoever recklessly
violates §
881.31(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both.
   (b)   Any person who recklessly discloses information received from the
Internal Revenue Service in violation of §
881.31(a) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
881.31(a) constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 3-2018, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 881.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates §
881.17, §
881.16(a), or §
881.04 by failing to remit Shelby income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both.  If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee of Shelby, the individual is subject to discharge from employment.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
881.16(a) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both.  If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee of Shelby, the individual is subject
to discharge from employment.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
881.16(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his books, records, papers, and federal and state income
tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his
books, records, papers, or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
Social Security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (d) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (a) of this
section.
(Ord. 50-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
CHAPTER 882:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
Section
   
882.01   Levy of tax; rate; exemptions
   
882.02   Use of tax
   
882.03   Effective dates of tax
Cross-reference:
   Display and obstruction of license plates, see §
436.09
   Use of illegal license plates, see §
436.10
Statutory reference:
   Licensing of motor vehicles, see R.C. Ch. 4503
   Motor Vehicle License Tax, see R.C. §§ 4504.06, 4504.172
§ 882.01  LEVY OF TAX; RATE; EXEMPTIONS.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 4504.172, the city hereby levies an annual license tax
upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways. The rate
of the tax shall be $5 per motor vehicle and it shall be levied on all motor
vehicles the district of registration of which, as defined in R.C. § 4503.10,
is the city. Such tax shall be subject to the exemptions provided in R.C. §§
4503.16, 4503.17 and 4503.171.
(Ord. 11-88, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 882.02  USE OF TAX.
   All of the tax levied by §
882.01 is for the purpose described in R.C. § 4504.06 and shall be used for no
other purpose.
(Ord. 11-88, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 882.03  EFFECTIVE DATES OF TAX.
   The tax levied by §
882.01 shall be for the 1989 registration year, beginning on January 1, 1989,
or such other dates as fixed by law or by regulations of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, and for each registration year thereafter; provided, however, that if
the registration year is changed prior to the first collection under the
provisions of this chapter, then the levy provided by §
882.01 shall be for the first registration year permitted by law. 
(Ord. 11-88, passed 4-4-1988)
CHAPTER 884:  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
   
884.01   Definitions
   
884.02   Rate of tax
   
884.03   Exemptions
   
884.04   Collection of tax from occupants
   
884.05   Registration
   
884.06   Reporting and remitting
   
884.07   Penalties and interest
   
884.08   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by Director of
Finance and Public Record
   
884.09   Appeals
   
884.10   Board of Review
   
884.11   Records
   
884.12   Refunds
   
884.13   Tax as debt; actions to collect
   
884.14   Credit of moneys received
   
884.15   Violations
 
   
884.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Theft from livery or hostelry, see §
672.14
Statutory reference:
   Hotels, see R.C. Ch. 3731
   Innkeepers, see R.C. Ch. 4721
   Power to levy, see R.C. § 5739.02(C)
§ 884.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Director." The Director of Finance and Public Record of the city.
   (b)   "Hotel." Any establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised or held
out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for a
consideration to guests, in which five or more rooms are used for the
accommodation of guests, whether the rooms are in one or several structures.
   (c)   "Occupancy." The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room or rooms, or space or portion thereof, in any hotel,
for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.  The use or possession of, or the
right to use or possess, any room or any suite of connecting rooms as office
space, banquet or private dining rooms, or exhibit, sample or display space,
shall not be considered use or possession, or the right to use or possess, all
or any portion of the room or suite of rooms for dwelling, lodging or sleeping
purposes. 
   (d)   "Operator." The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other
capacity.  Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing
agent of any type or character, other than an employee, the managing agent
shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall
have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal.  Compliance with
the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   (e)   "Person." Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (f)   "Rent." The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
the occupant is liable for the occupancy without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   (g)   "Transient guest." A person occupying a room or rooms for sleeping
accommodations for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.02  RATE OF TAX.
   (a)   Commencing on January 1, 1987, there is hereby levied, for the purpose
of providing revenue with which to meet the needs of the city for general
operating expenses, a tax of 3% on all rents received by a hotel for lodging
furnished to transient guests.
   (b)   This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient guest to the city,
which debt is extinguished only by payment thereof to the operator as trustee
for the city, or to the city.  The transient guest shall pay the tax to the
operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid.  If the rent is paid in
installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each
installment.  The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient guest ceasing to
occupy space in the hotel.  If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the
operator of the hotel, the Director may require that the tax be paid directly
to the Director. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   No tax shall be imposed under this chapter:
      (1)   Upon rents not within the taxing power of the city under the
Constitution or laws of Ohio or the United States;
      (2)   Upon rents paid by the State of Ohio or any of its political
subdivisions; or
      (3)   Upon rents of $5 a day or less.
   (b)   No exemption claimed under divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) hereof shall be
granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and,
under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the Director.  All claims
of exemption under division (a)(3) hereof shall be made in a manner prescribed
by the Director.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.04  COLLECTION OF TAX FROM OCCUPANTS.
   (a)   The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from
the rent, and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time the occupancy
is arranged or contracted and charged for, and upon every evidence of occupancy
or any bill or statement of charge made for an occupancy issued or delivered by
the operator.  The tax shall be paid by the occupant to the operator as trustee
for and on account of the city, and the operator shall be liable for the
collection thereof and for the tax.
   (b)   No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or
absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if
added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.05  REGISTRATION.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter or within 30 days
after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting lodging to transient guests shall register the hotel with the Director
and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate, to
be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.  The certificate
shall, among other things, state the following:
   (a)   The name of the operator;
   (b)   The address of the hotel;
   (c)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
   (d)   The following statement:  "This transient occupancy registration
certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the transient occupancy tax ordinance by registering with
the Director of Finance and Public Record for the purpose of collecting from
transient guests the transient occupancy tax and remitting the tax to the
Director.  This certificate does not constitute a permit."
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.06  REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Director, make a return to the Director, on
forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the
amount of tax collected for transient occupancies.  All claims for exemption
from the tax, filed by occupants with the operator during the reporting period,
shall be filed with the report.  At the time the return is filed, the full
amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Director.  The Director
may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she
deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he or she may
require further information in the return if the information is pertinent to
the collection of the tax.  Returns and payments are due immediately upon
cessation of business for any reason.  All taxes collected by operators
pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city
until payment thereof is made to the Director.  All returns and payments
submitted by each operator shall be treated as confidential by the Director and
shall not be released by him or her, except upon order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, or to an officer or agent of the United States, the State of
Ohio, the County of Richland or the City of Shelby, for official use only.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.07  PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (a)   Delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this
chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty equal to 10% of the amount
of the tax, in addition to the tax.
   (b)   Fraud.  If the Director determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty equal to 25% of
the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties
stated in division (a) hereof.
   (c)   Interest.  In addition to the previous penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the
rate of 1% per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax exclusive
of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent
until paid.
   (d)   Penalties during pendency of hearing or appeal.  No penalty provided
in this chapter shall be imposed during the pendency of any hearing provided
for in §
884.08, nor during the pendency of any appeal to the Board of Review provided
for in §
884.10.
   (e)   Abatement of interest and penalty.  In cases where a return has been
filed in good faith and an assessment has been paid within the time prescribed
by the Director, the Director may abate any charge of penalty or interest, or
both.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.08  FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY DIRECTOR
OF FINANCE AND PUBLIC RECORD.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the Director shall proceed in such
manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his or her estimate of the tax due.  As soon as the Director shall procure
the facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed
by this chapter, and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to
collect the same and to make a report and remittance, he or she shall proceed
to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for in this chapter.  In case the determination is made, the Director
shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address.  The operator
may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice, make an
application in writing to the Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. 
If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time
prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the
Director, shall become final and conclusive, and immediately due and payable. 
If an application is made, the Director shall give not less than five days'
written notice, in the manner prescribed herein, to the operator, to show
cause, at a time and place fixed in the notice, why the amount specified
therein should not be fixed for the tax, interest and penalties.  At the
hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence as to why the specified
tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.  After the hearing, the
Director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall give written
notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of the determination and
the amount of the tax, interest and penalties.  The amount determined to be due
shall be payable after 15 days, unless an appeal is taken as provided in §
884.09.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.09  APPEALS.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Director, with respect to the
amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Board of
Review by filing a notice of appeal with the Director within 15 days of the
serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due.  The Board of Review
shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall give notice in
writing to the operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings
of the Board of Review shall be served upon the appellant in the manner
prescribed above for service of a notice of hearing.  Any amount found to be
due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.10  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   A Board of Review, consisting of the Mayor and the Director of Law, is
hereby established.  The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall
keep a record of its transactions.  Any hearings by the Board may be conducted
privately, and the provisions of §
884.06, with reference to the confidential character of information required to
be disclosed by this chapter, shall apply to such matters as may be heard
before the Board on appeal.
   (b)   The Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any ruling or decision
of the Director and, at the request of the operator, the Director or another
person, is empowered to substitute alternative methods of allocation.  The
Board shall, in hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any
such ruling or decision, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.11  RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator responsible for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of tax that he or she may have been responsible for collecting and
paying to the city, which records the Director shall have the right to inspect
at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.12  REFUNDS.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid,
or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
divisions (b) and (c) hereof, provided that a claim in writing therefor,
stating, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the Director within three years of the date of payment. 
The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director.
   (b)   An operator may claim as a refund or take as a credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Director that the person from whom the tax has been collected
was not a transient guest; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient guest or credited to rent subsequently payable
by the transient to the operator.
   (c)   A transient guest may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, by
filing a claim in the manner provided in division (a) hereof, but only when the
tax was paid by the transient guest directly to the Director, or when the
transient guest, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the Director that the transient guest has been unable to obtain
a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   (d)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.13  TAX AS DEBT; ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by a transient guest under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient guest to the city. 
Any tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.  Any person owing money to the
city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought
in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.14  CREDIT OF MONEYS RECEIVED.
   The moneys received under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited
into the General Fund of the city. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.15  VIOLATIONS.
   No operator or other person shall fail or refuse to register as required
herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or to furnish a
supplemental return or other data required by the Director, or render a false
or fraudulent return or claim.  No person required to make, render, sign or
verify any report or claim shall make a false or fraudulent report or claim
with the intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due and
required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 34-86, passed 12-1-1986)
§ 884.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 890:  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS
Section
   
890.01   Shelby Community Reinvestment Area; Housing Officer; Housing Council;
Tax Incentive Review Council
Cross-reference:
   Taxation generally, see Charter §
106
Statutory reference:
   Community improvement corporations, see R.C. Ch. 1724
   Community reinvestment areas, see R.C. §§ 3735.65 to 3735.70, 5709.671
   Community urban redevelopment corporations, see R.C. Ch. 1728
§ 890.01  SHELBY COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREA; HOUSING OFFICER; HOUSING COUNCIL;
TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW COUNCIL.
   (a)   It is hereby found and determined that the Shelby Community
Reinvestment Area is an area in which housing facilities are located and new
housing construction and repair of existing facilities or structures are
discouraged; that the Shelby Community Reinvestment Area qualifies and is
hereby established and designated as a Community Reinvestment Area pursuant to
and in accordance with, and meeting the requirements of, the Community
Reinvestment Area Program; and that the boundaries of the Shelby Community
Reinvestment Area shall be as shown and described on Exhibit A attached to
original Ordinance 66-98, passed November 16, 1998 and all annexations from
that date as shown on Exhibit B which is attached to Ordinance 9-2008, which
exhibit is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
   (b)   (1)   Within the Shelby Community Reinvestment Area, the percentage of
tax exemption on the increase in the assessed valuation resulting from
improvements to commercial and industrial real property and the term of those
exemptions shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis in advance of
construction or remodeling occurring according to the rules outlined in R.C. §
3735.67. The results of the negotiation as approved by Council will be set in
writing in a Community Reinvestment Area Agreement as outlined in R.C. §
3735.671. For residential property, a tax exemption on the increase in the
assessed valuation resulting from improvements as described in R.C. § 3735.67
shall be granted upon proper application by the property owner and
certification thereof by the designated Housing Officer for the following
periods. Residential applications must be filed with the Housing Officer no
later than six months after completion of construction, as follows:
         A.   One hundred percent for the remodeling of residential structures
for ten years (term the same for all) containing not more than two housing
units and upon which the cost of remodeling is at least $2,500, as described in
R.C. § 3735.67;
         B.   Fifty percent of the value of the new residential structures for
15 years (term same for all) for the new construction of dwellings containing
not more than two housing units, as described in R.C. § 3735.67.
         C.   Twelve years (negotiated - up to 12 years) for existing
commercial and industrial facilities, to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis
in advance of construction or remodeling occurring.
         D.   Fifteen years (negotiated - up to 15 years) for new commercial or
industrial facilities, to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis in advance of
construction occurring.
      (2)   If remodeling qualifies for an exemption, during the period of the
exemption, the dollar amount of the increase in market value of the structure
shall be exempt from real property taxation. If new construction qualifies for
an exemption, during the period of the exemption the structure shall not be
considered to be an improvement on the land on which it is located for the
purpose of real property taxation.
   (c)   All commercial and industrial projects are required to comply with the
state application fee requirements of R.C. § 3735.672(C) and the local annual
monitoring fee of 1% of the amount of taxes exempted under the agreement, a
minimum of $500 up to a maximum of $2,500 annually (the monitoring fee is a
local option).
   (d)   To administer and implement the provisions of this section, the Mayor
or his or her designee is designated as the Housing Officer as described in
R.C. § 3735.70.
   (e)   A Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council shall be established,
consisting of two members appointed by the Mayor, two members appointed by
Council and one member appointed by the Planning Commission. The majority of
the members shall then appoint two additional members who shall be residents
within the area. Terms of the members of the Housing Council shall be for three
years. An unexpired term resulting from a vacancy in the Housing Council shall
be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment was made.
   (f)   A Tax Incentive Review Council shall be established pursuant to R.C. §
5709.85 and shall consist of three representatives appointed by the Board of
County Commissioners, two representatives of the city, appointed by the
municipal CEO with Council concurrence, the County Auditor or his or her
designee and a representative of each affected Board of Education. At least two
members must be residents of the city. The Tax Incentive Review Council shall
review annually the compliance of all agreements involving the granting of
exemptions for commercial or industrial real property improvements under R.C. §
3735.671 and make written recommendations to Council as to continuing,
modifying or terminating the agreement based upon the performance of the
agreement.
   (g)   Council reserves the right to re-evaluate the Shelby Community
Reinvestment Area after December 31, 2009, at which time Council may direct the
Housing Officer not to accept any new applications for real property tax
exemptions as described in R.C. § 3735.67, with respect to any additional
construction or rehabilitation thereafter commenced in the Shelby Community
Reinvestment Area.
(Ord. 9-2008, passed 5-19-2008)
PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
      Chapter
         
1020.   EXCAVATIONS
         
1022.   CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS AND PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS
         
1024.   SIDEWALKS
         
1026.   STREET TREES
         
1028.   VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
CHAPTER 1020:  EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
1020.01   Permit required; application; bond
   
1020.02   Establishment of legal grade prior to installation of utilities and
sidewalks
 
   
1020.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Barricades and warning lights, see §
660.09
   Obstruction of public ways, see §
412.01
   Temporary obstructions of public ways and grounds, see §
1476.02
Statutory reference:
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets, see R.C. § 5589.10
   Liability for damage, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Openings by the municipality, see R.C. § 723.02
§ 1020.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; BOND.
   Any person who desires to make an opening in the pavement of any street,
alley, avenue or public grounds, improved with brick, asphalt, wood block,
stone block or macadam, shall make a written application to the Mayor for a
permit to open the improved street, alley, avenue or public grounds. The
application shall set forth the location, kind and extent of the pavement to be
taken up, the known purpose and size of the opening to be made and the time
when the opening is desired or necessary. Upon filing the application, the
applicant shall give cash or a bond in an amount sufficient to cover all
damages to the city and the public by reason of the opening or improvement so
proposed. The amount and surety thereof shall be approved by the Mayor,
conditioned upon the applicant's properly replacing the pavement, after proper
tamping of the filled dirt, in as good a condition as it was before the
excavation, all of the work to be completed within a designated time at the
expense of the applicant and to be performed under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Streets and Sewers. The bond shall be further conditioned
upon the applicant's keeping proper lights over, above and about the excavation
during the work and preserving and keeping the city free and harmless of any
costs, expenses, damages or claims arising or growing out of the rights and
privileges so granted. Thereupon the Mayor shall issue a permit for the opening
of the street, alley, avenue or public grounds so specified in the application.
(1923 Code, § 110)
§ 1020.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF LEGAL GRADE PRIOR TO INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES AND
SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall install any utilities or construct a sidewalk on or beneath
any street within the city until a legal grade for the street has been
established by proper action of Council.
(Ord. 45-53, passed 9-21-1953)
§ 1020.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
1020.01 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. Each opening or excavation made in violation of any of the
provisions shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
1020.02 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense and shall be required to make any changes necessary to conform
to the legal grade when it is established by proper action of Council.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1986 Code, § 905.99)
CHAPTER 1022:  CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS AND PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
1022.01   Private driveways upon improved streets
   
1022.02   New and unimproved streets
   
1022.03   Construction and material specifications
   
1022.04   Railroad grade crossing construction and maintenance requirements
 
   
1022.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alteration, dedication, vacation or change of name, see Charter §§
103,
104,
105
   Board of Revision of Assessments, see Charter §§
81 et seq.
   City's portion of cost, see Charter §
89
   Damages assessed, see Charter §
84
   Excavations, see
Ch. 1020
   Interest on assessment bonds, see Charter §
87
   Limitations on assessments, supplements, see Charter §§
88,
92
   Local improvements, methods of assessment, see Charter §§
76,
77
   Supervision of public ways, see Charter §
102
§ 1022.01  PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS UPON IMPROVED STREETS.
   (a)   No person shall construct or attempt to construct or permit or cause
to be constructed any private opening or driveway in, upon, and to any street
or avenue improved, or in the process of being improved, with paving and
curbing in the city without first having obtained the written consent of the
Superintendent of the Service Department to do so, nor otherwise than in the
manner and form adopted and approved by the City Engineer.
   (b)   Minimum construction requirements.
      (1)   Asphalt driveways.  Six inches of ODOT (Ohio Department of
Transportation) 304 compacted limestone aggregate base course. Three inches of
ODOT 448 Type 1 Asphalt.
      (2)   Concrete driveways. Four inches of ODOT 304 compacted limestone
aggregate base course, Six inches of ODOT 452 Plain Portland cement concrete.
(1923 Code, § 190) (Ord. 46-2013, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 1022.02  NEW AND UNIMPROVED STREETS.
   The minimum requirements for construction and improvement of new and/or
unimproved streets shall be as follows:
   (a)   Pavement widths pursuant to the typical section drawing on file with
the City Engineer (minimum back to back of curb).
 
(1) Main thoroughfares          40 feet
(2) Primary streets             35 feet
(3) Secondary and minor streets 27 feet
 
   (b)   Minimum construction requirements pursuant to the typical section
drawing on file with the City Engineer.
      (1)   City standard concrete curbs and gutters or equivalent. All curb
and gutter to have six-inch underdrain.
      (2)   Main thoroughfares and primary streets.
         A.   Asphalt. Ten inches of ODOT 304 Limestone base, four inches of
ODOT 448 asphalt.
         B.   Concrete.  Four inches of ODOT 304 Limestone base, eight inches
of non-reinforced Portland Cement concrete.
      (3)   Secondary and minor streets.
         A.   Asphalt.  Eight inches of ODOT 304 Limestone base, three inches
of ODOT 448 asphalt.
         B.   Concrete:  Four inches of ODOT 304 Limestone base, seven inches
of non-reinforced Portland Cement concrete.
(Ord. 14-57, passed 4-1-1957; Ord. 46-2013, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 1022.03  CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   The kind and quality of materials and the construction methods used to
construct and improve streets according to the provisions of this chapter shall
conform to the State of Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and
Material Specifications, the then current edition. The classification of
streets shall be as defined in the Subdivision Regulations. All streets shall
be subject to individual consideration and recommendation by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 46-2013, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 1022.04  RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The owner or operator of every railroad track or railroad spur that
intersects, at grade, a public street in the city limits, shall do the
following:
      (1)   Install and maintain a good, smooth, and level crossing at the
intersection. The crossing shall be paved with wood ties and/or steel rails, in
combination with asphalt and concrete, or with steel plates or other suitable
and durable materials approved by the Director of Public Services.  The
crossing shall be constructed so that its width extends at least two feet
beyond the paved portion on each side of the intersected street, and so that
its length extends the full width of the railroad right-of-way. When more than
one track intersects a street and the nearest rails of the tracks are less than
15 feet apart, the paving or material herein required shall extend between the
tracks as well as between the rails and two feet outside the outermost rails.
      (2)   Maintain each crossing across the entire width of the intersecting
roadway so as to be safely passable by motor vehicles.
      (3)   Maintain each crossing so that it is level, smooth, secure and even
across the entire width of the intersecting roadway and free from potholes;
protruding bolts and spikes; uneven, broken or displaced timbers; raised rails;
debris; or other defects.
      (4)   Maintain each crossing so that no portion of it shall be permitted
to deflect or displace vertically more than one-half inch when crossed by a
legally loaded motor vehicle designed for highway use.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service, upon determining that a rail crossing
is deficient of the standards set forth herein, shall notify in writing the
owner or operator of the railroad track or spur that the crossing is in need of
construction, rebuild or repair.  The notice shall fully describe the work to
be done and shall state the consequences of failure to comply.  Upon receipt of
the notice, the owner or operator shall commence construction, repair or
rebuilding of the specified crossing within 30 days and shall prosecute it in
good faith upon completion.
(Ord. 24-2002, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 46-2013, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 1022.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 46-2013, passed 1-6-2014)
CHAPTER 1024:  SIDEWALKS
Section
   
1024.01   Construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters
   
1024.02   Resolution of necessity; notice
   
1024.03   Distance from property line
   
1024.04   Width on certain streets
   
1024.05   Minimum width and depth
   
1024.06   Depth of sidewalks at private drives and intersections
   
1024.07   Grade
 
   
1024.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Assessment bonds, see Charter §
96
   Bicycles upon sidewalks, see §
444.06
   Construction and repair, see Charter §
94
   Driving upon sidewalks, see §
432.24
   Establishment of legal grade prior to installation of sidewalks, see §
1020.02
   Excavations, see
Ch. 1020
   Maintenance of sidewalks, see §
660.05
   Obstruction of sidewalks, see §
660.10
   Removal of obstructions over sidewalks, see §
1476.03
§ 1024.01  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   Council may require the construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs or
gutters within the city by the owners of lots or lands abutting thereon. Upon
the failure of the owners to construct or repair the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters within the time prescribed in the resolution adopted under §
1024.02, Council may cause the sidewalks, curbs or gutters to be constructed or
repaired and assess the total cost thereof against the lots or lands abutting
thereon, notwithstanding the provisions of R.C. §§ 727.03 and 727.05.
(Ord. 23-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.02  RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY; NOTICE.
   (a)   When it is deemed necessary by the city to require the construction or
repair of sidewalks, curbs or gutters within the city by the owners of lots or
lands abutting thereon, Council shall cause plans, specifications and an
estimate of the cost of the construction or repair to be prepared, showing the
location and dimensions of the sidewalks, curbs or gutters and the
specifications for the construction or repair thereof, and to be filed in the
office of the Clerk of Council. After the plans, specifications and estimates
of cost have been so filed, Council may declare the necessity for the
construction or repair of the sidewalks, curbs or gutters by the adoption of a
resolution which shall:
      (1)   Approve the plans, specifications and estimate of cost of the
proposed construction or repair on file as provided in this section;
      (2)   Describe the lots and lands abutting upon the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters to be constructed or repaired by the termini of the improvement or by
street address;
      (3)   Set forth that the sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be constructed
or repaired by the owners of lots or lands abutting thereon in accordance with
the specifications on file in the office of the Clerk of Council;
      (4)   Set forth the time within which the sidewalks, curbs or gutters
shall be constructed or repaired by the owners of lots or lands abutting
thereon, which shall not be less than 30 days from the date of service of
notice under division (b) hereof on the owner of the lots or lands; and
      (5)   State that in the event that the sidewalks, curbs or gutters are
not constructed or repaired by the owners of lots or lands abutting thereon in
accordance with the plans and specifications and within the time prescribed in
the resolution, the city will so construct or repair the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters and assess the cost thereof against the lots and lands abutting
thereon.
   (b)   Notice of the passage of a resolution of necessity under division (a)
hereof shall be served by the Clerk of Council or a person designated by the
Clerk upon the owners of lots or lands abutting upon the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters to be constructed or repaired in the same manner as service of summons
in civil cases, or by certified mail addressed to the owner at his or her last
known address or to the address to which tax bills are sent, or by a
combination of the foregoing methods. If it appears by the return of service or
the return of the certified mail notice that one or more of the owners cannot
be found, the owners shall be served by publication of the notice once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city. The return of the person
serving the notice or a certified copy thereof or a returned receipt for notice
forwarded by certified mail accepted by the addressee or anyone purporting to
act for him or her shall be prima facie evidence of the service of notice under
this section. The notice shall also set forth the place where the
specifications governing the construction or repair of the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters are on file and the time within which the owner of the lot or parcel of
land may construct or repair the sidewalks, curbs or gutters and shall state
that, in the event the owner does not construct or repair the sidewalks, curbs
or gutters in accordance with the specifications, and within such time, the
city will construct or repair the sidewalks, curbs or gutters and assess the
costs thereof against the lot or land of the owner.
   (c)   Upon the expiration of the time within which sidewalks, curbs or
gutters shall be constructed or repaired by the owner of the lots or lands
abutting thereon as set forth in the resolution adopted under division (a)
hereof, the sidewalks, curbs or gutters not constructed or repaired by the
owners of the lots or lands abutting thereon shall be constructed or repaired
by the city in accordance with the resolution and Council shall, upon the
completion of the construction or repair, assess the cost thereof against the
lots or lands abutting thereon.
   (d)   In anticipation of the collection of the cost of the construction or
repair of the sidewalks, curbs or gutters from the owners of lots or lands
abutting thereon, Council may provide for the issuance of bonds or notes and
the proceeds thereof shall be used to pay for the construction or repair of the
sidewalks, curbs or gutters.
   (e)   In all proceedings pertaining to the construction or repair of
sidewalks, curbs or gutters under this section, sidewalks, curbs or gutters
upon different streets abutting upon lots or lands owned by different owners
may be included in the same resolution, notice, contract, ordinance or other
proceeding.
   (f)   Any and all assessments for construction and/or repair made pursuant
to this section shall be made as provided by the City Charter.
(Ord. 23-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.03  DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY LINE.
   On all new streets to be laid out in the city from August 1, 2019, all
sidewalks shall be uniformly one foot from the property line of the properties
abutting the streets.
(Ord. 18-52, passed 6-2-1952; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.04  WIDTH ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   The width of the sidewalks on the several streets and alleys hereinafter
mentioned shall be as follows:
   (a)   On Main Street they shall be nine feet wide from the east side of
Second Street west to the CSX Railroad. From the railway west to West Street
they shall be six feet wide; from West Street to the corporation line they
shall be five feet wide.
   (b)   On Broadway they shall be eight feet wide from Main Street to Whitney
Avenue; and north to the corporation line they shall be five feet wide; and
from Main Street south to the corporation line they shall be a minimum of five
feet wide.
   (c)   On Gamble Street they shall be eight feet wide from the south line of
Inlot Nos. 13 and 16, north to Whitney Avenue; five feet wide from Whitney
Avenue north to the corporation line; and from the south line of such Inlot
Nos. 13 and 16, south to the corporation line, they shall be five feet wide.
   (d)   On all other streets, they shall be five feet.
   (e)   When sidewalks have heretofore been constructed on any of the above-
mentioned streets of a less or greater width than is provided for in this
section, the sidewalks shall remain such width until two-thirds or more of that
sidewalk length have to be rebuilt, then they shall be constructed to the width
fixed herein by this chapter.
(1923 Code, § 102; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1- 2019)
§ 1024.05  MINIMUM WIDTH AND DEPTH.
   On all new streets to be laid out in the city from August 1, 2019, all
sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and four inches of concrete in
depth.
(1986 Code, § 913.05; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.06  DEPTH OF SIDEWALKS AT PRIVATE DRIVES AND INTERSECTIONS.
   On all new streets to be laid out in the city from August 1, 2019, all
sidewalks at private drives and intersections shall be a minimum of six inches
of concrete in depth.
(1986 Code, § 913.06; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.07  GRADE.
   On all new streets to be laid out in the city from August 1, 2019, the grade
of sidewalks shall be three-eighths of an inch per foot above the grade of the
top of the curb. The cross slope of the sidewalk shall be one-quarter of an
inch per foot.
(Ord. 18-52, passed 6-2-1952; Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 1024.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 14-2019, passed 7-1-2019)
CHAPTER 1026:  STREET TREES
Section
   
1026.01   Planting on public ways; permit required
   
1026.02   Application to Shade Tree Commission
   
1026.03   Trimming of trees required
   
1026.04   Carolina or Lombardy poplars
 
   
1026.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Damaging of vegetation, see §
1064.06
   Injury to trees, see §
642.04
   Interference with flowers and trees in public parks, see §
1062.04
   Shade Tree Commission, see
Ch. 282
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, see R.C. § 727.011
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, see R.C. § 715.20
§ 1026.01  PLANTING ON PUBLIC WAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall plant any tree or shrub upon any public way unless he
or she has first obtained a permit in writing from the Mayor specifying the
size, type, species and location on the public way of the tree or shrub to be
planted.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to deny a permit to any person who
proposes to plant upon a public way any tree or shrub of a size, type or
species found to be undesirable by the Shade Tree Commission or found to be
undesirable for the location proposed. He or she is also authorized to deny to
any person who proposes to plant any tree or shrub upon a public way if the
location is found by the Commission to be unsuitable for planting of trees and
shrubs. 
(Ord. 8-90, passed 6-18-1990)
§ 1026.02  APPLICATION TO SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
   (a)   All property owners and/or their authorized custodians are hereby
required to file an application with the Shade Tree Commission for permission
whenever planting, removing or major trimming, which alters the general
appearance or landscape of the area, of trees, shrubs or hedges upon the public
right of way.
   (b)   All planting, removing or major trimming of trees and shrubs shall be
in compliance with §
1026.01.
   (c)   Application for the permits shall be made available to the public
through the Clerk of Council's office.
(Ord. 4-80, passed 3-17-1980)
§ 1026.03  TRIMMING OF TREES REQUIRED.
   No person, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot or parcel of
land fronting on any street, avenue or public ground of the city, in front of
which trees are planted and growing, shall fail to keep the trees so trimmed as
not to obstruct the passage of light from any street lamp in the vicinity
thereof. No the owner or agent shall fail to keep all trees in front of his or
her lots and lands so trimmed that all branches overhanging streets and
pavements are clear, not less than eight feet above the surface of the streets,
avenues or public grounds, nor shall the branches be permitted to extend over
any street or highway in the city in such manner as to obstruct the free use of
the same, nor to the annoyance and inconvenience of any resident. If any such
owner or agent, after being notified by the Superintendent of Streets and
Sewers to trim the trees, refuses or neglects to do the same as ordered within
five days, the same shall be done or caused to be done by the Superintendent
and he or she shall certify the cost and expense thereof and the same together
with a penalty of 25% of the cost and expense shall be assessed against the
lots or lands. The remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
1026.99.
(1986 Code, § 557.01)
§ 1026.04  CAROLINA OR LOMBARDY POPLARS.
   (a)   No person shall plant or set out upon or near any street, alley or
sidewalk of the city any tree of the variety commonly known as Carolina or
Lombardy poplar.
   (b)   If the owner of any Lombardy or Carolina poplar, after being notified
by the Mayor to cut down and destroy the same, refuses or neglects to do so
within five days of the notification, then the trees shall be caused to be cut
down and destroyed by the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers. The remedy
shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
1026.99. 
(1986 Code, § 557.03)
§ 1026.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. 
CHAPTER 1028:  VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section
   
1028.01   Petition required; filing fee
   
1028.02   Service of notice; report of the Board of Revision of Assessments
   
1028.03   Refund of filing fee
 
   
1028.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Board of Revision of Assessments, see Charter §§
81 et seq.
   Vacation of streets and alleys; change of street names, see Charter §
105; Table of Special Ordinances, Tables
III,
VII
Statutory reference:
   Vacating of streets generally, see R.C. §§ 723.04 et seq.
§ 1028.01  PETITION REQUIRED; FILING FEE.
   (a)   Any adjoining property owner who desires the vacation of a street or
alley shall file with the Clerk of Council a petition requesting the same. 
This petition shall read substantially as follows:
   PETITION TO VACATE STREET OR ALLEY
   To the Council of the City of Shelby, Ohio:
   We, the undersigned owners of lots in the City of Shelby, Richland County,
Ohio, abutting on the street or alley hereinafter described, to wit:  (insert
an adequate description of the street or alley proposed to be vacated and
attach a plat and description prepared by a registered surveyor showing the
street or alley)
                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                        ,
respectfully petition that the street or alley be vacated between the points
aforesaid for the following reason(s):
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
   We state that the vacation will not be detrimental to the general interests
of the citizens of the City of Shelby.  We acknowledge that the vacation will
be subject to the provisions of Ohio R.C. § 723.041, wherein a permanent
easement in the vacated street or alley will be retained by and for the benefit
of the city and other public utilities.
   WARNING!
   Sign only your own name upon this petition.  Signing another person's name
constitutes a violation of law and may invalidate this petition.  If you have
the legal authority to sign on behalf of another, such as a guardianship or a
power of attorney, attach a copy of your legal authority to this petition.
NAME   ADDRESS   PHONE   LOT NUMBER(S)
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
   CIRCULATOR'S STATEMENT
   I, ____________________, declare under penalty of law that I reside at the
address appearing below my signature hereto; that I am the circulator of the
foregoing petition containing ______ (number) signatures; that I witnessed the
affixing of every signature; that all signers are to the best of my knowledge
qualified to sign; and that every signature is to the best of my knowledge and
belief the signature of the person whose signature it purports to be.
                                                            
         (signature of circulator)
                                                            
         (residence address of circulator)
   CERTIFICATE OF VALIDITY
   I, the undersigned, being the duly elected and qualified Director of Finance
and Public Record, and ex officio Clerk of Council, do hereby certify to the
Council of the City of Shelby that I have reviewed and examined the foregoing
petition and find the same to be sufficient and valid.
                                                            
         Director of Finance and Public Record
   (b)   The petition shall contain the signatures of not less than 51% of the
adjoining property owners.  A filing fee of $150 to cover the costs of
notification, publication, recording and other direct costs shall accompany the
petition and shall be deposited into the General Fund.  The Clerk of Council
shall determine the validity and sufficiency of the petition and shall certify
the same to City Council in writing no later than the second regular Council
meeting after its filing. 
(Ord. 35-99, passed 7-19-1999; Ord. 35-2018, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 1028.02  SERVICE OF NOTICE; REPORT OF THE BOARD OF REVISION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   After the passage of a resolution declaring Council's intent to vacate a
street or alley, the Clerk of Council shall cause notice to be served as
required by Charter §
105, within seven days.  The Board of Revision of Assessments shall make and
file its report with the Clerk of Council within 30 days of the passage of the
resolution of intent.  The Clerk of Council shall cause the Board's report to
be placed upon the agenda of the next regular Council meeting.
(Ord. 35-99, passed 7-19-1999)
§ 1028.03  REFUND OF FILING FEE.
   In the event that the petitioned street or alley is not vacated, the
Director of Finance and Public Record shall refund any unused portion of the
filing fee.
(Ord. 35-99, passed 7-19-1999)
§ 1028.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever signs another person's name to a petition as described in §
1028.01 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense.
   (b)   Whoever makes a false circulator's statement as described in §
1028.01 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. 
(Ord. 35-99, passed 7-19-1999)
TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES
      Chapter
         
1040.   WATER
         
1042.   SEWER REGULATIONS
         
1044.   SEWER CHARGES
         
1046.   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
         
1050.   ELECTRICITY
         
1052.   UTILITY PAYMENT ASSISTANCE
         
1054.   RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT
         
1056.   INTERNET SERVICES
Editor's note:
   The city contracts, from time to time, with Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., for
natural gas service. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained,
at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
CHAPTER 1040:  WATER
Section
   
1040.01   Line requirement
   
1040.02   Extension of lines; expenses
   
1040.03   Plans and estimates
   
1040.04   Rules, regulations and fixed charges for municipal water system
   
1040.05   Connection of private, auxiliary and emergency supplies with public
supplies
   
1040.06   Water service outside corporate limits
   
1040.07   Backflow prevention devices
   
1040.08   Fluoridation
   
1040.09   Offensive substances in waterways
   
1040.10   Disposal facilities
   
1040.11   Description of water supply watershed area
 
   
1040.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Council to establish charges for water line connections, see §
220.06
   Dumping into sewers, ditches, watercourses and the like, see §
660.12
   Pollution, see §§
660.04,
1064.07
   Power to construct, regulate, see Charter §§
111 et seq.
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   Water connections, see Charter §
93
   Water wells, see §
1296.10
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory water connections, see R.C. §§ 729.06, 743.23
   Fluoridation, see R.C. § 6109.20
   Protection of water supply; prevention of water pollution, see R.C. §§
715.08, 743.25
   Water pollution control, see R.C. Ch. 6111
§ 1040.01  LINE REQUIREMENT.
   All water lines installed by the Division of Water for the transmission of
water from the Water Treatment Plant, over, upon or through any property, shall
have a diameter of not less than eight inches unless authorized by the Director
of Public Service.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.02  EXTENSION OF LINES; EXPENSES.
   On petition of the abutting property owners who desire the extension of
water lines within the city, the water lines shall be extended on the following
basis and proportions:
   (a)   The cost and expense of all labor and materials shall be borne by the
property owners up to and including the cost of an eight-inch water line, and
the property owners shall also bear a proportionate cost of all lines in excess
of eight inches.
   (b)   The city shall assume the entire cost of the installation of any line
over eight inches in diameter, less the property owner's estimated cost of an
eight-inch line in that portion described by §
89 of the City Charter.
   (c)   For water lines within new subdivisions, see the City Subdivision
Regulations.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.03  PLANS AND ESTIMATES.
   Upon acceptance of the petition of the petitioning property owners, the
Division of Water shall prepare specification plans and estimates of cost for
the guidance of the Director of Public Service in making the improvement.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.04  RULES, REGULATIONS AND FIXED CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   Definitions and regulations.
   Rule 1
      The municipal water system, including all water mains, laterals, valves,
hydrants, meters and services, is under the exclusive control of the Director
of Public Service and his or her authorized employees. Such control includes
all piping from the city mains to the point of consumption or where city water
is finally discharged.
   Rule 2
      No person shall make or maintain a physical connection between any other
source of water and the water distribution system.
   Rule 3
      Any person having a connection to the water distribution system who
permits water to be wasted from the connection either by unnecessary use or to
prevent freezing, or who fails to prevent such wastage, shall have, after
notification, the water connection turned off.
   Rule 4
      No person may connect to any municipal water line, tamper with or remove
any meter or meter seal, or insert a meter bypass without the permission of the
Director of Public Service. Whoever violates this Rule shall have his or her
water turned off.
   (b)   Tampering with municipal water system.
   Rule 5
      If the Division of Water personnel find that a meter seal has been broken
or any bypass inserted and there is evidence that the meter has been tampered
with, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on again until the
consumer or owner of the premises has paid for the estimated quantity of water
which has been used and not registered.
   Rule 6
      No person shall operate, open or otherwise tamper with any valve,
stopcock, curb-stop or other device, after the same has been closed for a
violation of any rule or regulation of the Division of Water, or unlawfully
secure water through the valve, stopcock, curb-stop or other device after the
same has been closed for a violation of any rule or regulation of the Division
of Water, or in any way take water for private use unlawfully or without first
having secured the necessary permit from the Division of Water.
   Rule 7
      No person shall put filth, rocks, sticks, earth or any substance into any
valve box, curb box, manhole or reservoir or damage the same in any way.
   (c)   Permits, service, metering, meter reading, meter sizes. 
   Rule 8
      Every water service will be equipped with a meter. Meters of five-eighths
of an inch by three-fourths of an inch are domestic meters and are furnished
for all three-fourths of an inch service without cost to the service. Meters
and associated appurtenances for services larger than three-quarters of an inch
shall be installed by the Division of Water and charged to the customer at time
and material, plus 10%. The Division of Water shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair and/or replacement of all meters and associated
appurtenances in the system. Except as provided for in Rule 48, the
maintenance, repair and/or replacement shall be at the sole expense of the
Division of Water. It shall be the obligation of the customer to provide a
suitable location for water meters and associated appurtenances. The Division
of Water shall be the sole determiner of the suitability of water meter
locations.
   Rule 9
      Meter readings will be taken monthly and as near the same date each month
as possible. If the meter reader is unable to obtain a reading because the
meter is out of order or if he or she is unable to gain entrance to the meter,
an estimated charge will be made on previous readings or similar service of a
like use of water. Should free access not be provided within a reasonable time,
water may be shut off until repairs are made and free access provided and
reported to the Division of Water.
   Rule 10
      Any person desiring a water connection shall make application for a tap
and/or a permit for the connection at the Division of Water. There shall not be
more than one house or building on each meter. There may be more than one meter
for each building. Each meter constitutes a separate service.
   Rule 11
      Any person may discontinue water service and responsibility therefor by
proper notice to the Division of Water. Water will be turned off at the curb.
   Rule 12
      Contractors and tradespeople for building construction shall conform to
Rule 9. Taps for temporary use shall be made in the regular manner except that
a temporary setting must be provided for the meter, such setting to ensure
safety from theft, tampering and freezing.
   Rule 13
      Each meter of a size greater than five-eighths of an inch by three-
fourths of an inch shall be provided with a stopcock on the inlet and a
stopcock on the outlet piping. Five-eighths of an inch by three-fourths of an
inch domestic meters shall have one gate valve in the inlet piping and outlet.
The shut-offs shall be accessible at all times.
   Rule 14
      Inspectors, meter readers or employees of the Division of Water, whose
duty it is to enter upon private premises to read or examine meters, pipes or
other fixtures used in connection with water supply, shall be provided with
such credentials as the Director of Public Service deems necessary to identify
them as agents or employees of the Division of Water. The agents or employees
must have free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of the building for
the purpose of reading or inspecting meters, examining fixtures and observing
the manner in which the water is used. Any such inspection, examination or
observation, other than the normal and customary meter readings for billing
purposes, shall be conducted only in the event that it is reasonable to believe
that the inspection, examination or observation is necessary for the correction
of a defect or malfunction in the meters, pipes or other fixtures used in
connection with the water supply, or in the event that the owner of the private
premises requests the inspection, examination or observation. In case any
authorized inspector, meter reader or employee is refused admittance to any
premises or is prevented from making the examination, the water shall be turned
off and not turned on again until free access is given.
   (d)   Repairs to service lines.
   Rule 15
      Whenever a break or leak occurs in a service line between the main and
the curb box, the Division of Water will repair the same at its own expense as
soon as possible, but if a break or leak occurs back of the curb box or at any
place on the owner's premises, the repair or replacement shall be done by, and
at the expense of, the owner or his or her agent. If water distribution system
personnel deem it proper to shut off water in order to prevent waste or damage,
the water shall not be turned on again until repairs have been made.
   Rule 16
      The Division of Water does not guarantee any fixed pressure or continuous
supply, but it will, in case of an accident that will cause a shortage of water
to be shut off, endeavor to notify consumers affected thereby. Any consumer
using water for a steam boiler air compressor should have a supply tank large
enough to hold an ample supply for emergency cases as no claim will be
considered for damage by any such action.
   Rule 17
      The Division of Water reserves the right to remove a meter from any
premises and substitute another meter in its place, for the purpose of testing
or repairing.
   Rule 18
      The Division of Water will, on its initiative, undertake to test and
correct any meter which, in its judgment, is registered incorrectly, without
the consent of the consumer.
   Rule 19
      Upon the request from an owner or consumer and agreement to pay the test
charge, the Division of Water will remove any domestic meter to the meter shop
for a test, upon payment of a $10.00 fee. The fee for all other sizes shall be
on an hourly basis for the time required. If, upon examination and test, it is
found that the meter registers outside the tolerance limits of the following
percentages of water through it, viz. 2% over or under on five-eighths of an
inch by three-fourths of an inch meter, on flows from one to 20 gallons per
minute, 5% over or under on all other types and sizes of meters on flows from
low to high rating, then it shall be considered "inaccurate" and the water
charge will be adjusted upon the basis of that test.
   Rule 20
      All new or replacement of old taps from the main to the curb stop, sizes
three-fourths of an inch up to two inches, shall be K-type copper tubing. All
sizes above two inches shall be Class 52 ductile iron or C-900 PVC pipe. All
new or replacement of old service pipe from the curb stop to the inside of the
building, dwelling, trailer or apparatus containing the meter, sizes three-
fourths of an inch to two inches, shall be K-type copper tubing or approved
plastic. All sizes above two inches shall be ductile iron bell and spigot, C-
900 PVC pipe or approved equal. All pipe materials and installation shall be in
accordance with current AWWA specifications and approved by the Director of
Public Service.
   Rule 21
      All new domestic service lines shall provide a meter setting, Ford,
Mueller or an approved equal; all meters shall be set horizontally.
   (e)   Water service outside city.
   Rule 22
      All services and extensions outside the city limits must be laid under
supervision and according to the specifications of the Division of Water, and
the cost of the extensions and services, including repairs, supervision and
maintenance of all lines, shall be at the expense of the owner.
   Rule 23
      The Division of Water reserves the right to discontinue water service to
consumers outside city limits at any time, should it be deemed necessary to
conserve water for consumers within the city limits.
   Rule 24
      No service tap or permit will be issued to any consumer on any private
line unless the applicant files a signed release or order of authority with the
Division of Water from the owners for the private line and then only at the
discretion of the Director of Public Service. All rules and regulations not
conflicting by law shall apply to all consumers receiving their supply of water
over private lines from the water distribution system.
   Rule 25
      Before any extensions may be made to the water distribution system water
mains outside the city limits, which mains are supplied with water from the
water distribution system, a drawing or blueprint of the proposed extension
must first be submitted to the Division of Water and approved by the Director
of Public Service and Ohio EPA or appropriate permitting authority. If the plan
is approved, the water line must be laid under the supervision of the Division
of Water according to the plan and upon completion the blueprint must be filed
with the Division of Water with all proper measurements of all lines and sizes,
and marking of all valves and fittings and the location of all services. The
Division of Water reserves the right to order a master meter installed in any
main serving one or more consumers outside of the city limits, the cost of the
meter to be at the expense of the consumers. Upon the installation of a master
meter, the Division of Water will render only one charge for the entire amount
of water supplied by the service. Should the property owner wish auxiliary
meters on his or her service he or she may have them, but the Division of Water
will not share the cost of the meters and property owners can read the
auxiliary meters and apportion the assessment as they see fit.
   Rule 26
      No plumber shall make any extension or alteration for conducting water
into any premises until he or she first obtains a permit from the Division of
Water for each separate job, and he or she must make a full and complete report
on the back of the permit of uses for which water is supplied. The report must
be made within 72 hours after the completion of the work, and no stopcock or
curb-stop shall be left open or water turned on unless the permit authorizes
it.
   (f)   Fire protection service; fire hydrants.
   Rule 27
      Owners of all structures or facilities served by the Water Division and
having a sprinkler system and/or a standpipe system with hose cabinets, or
other similar facilities, that are served from an unmetered source, shall
purchase water service for the private fire protection facilities from the
Water Division. Prior to December 15 of each year, customers purchasing water
service for private fire protection facilities shall submit to the Water
Division, in writing, an accurate accounting of the total square footage within
the structure or facility that is protected by the customer's private fire
protection facilities. The Water Division retains the right to enter the
customer's structure or facility to verify the accuracy of the square footage
accounting. All discrepancies relating to the actual square footage of coverage
arising out of the inspections shall be submitted to the Director of Public
Service for a final determination.
   Rule 28
      The installation of fire protection service connections to supply water
to standpipes and sprinkler systems for fire protection only shall be permitted
when applications and plans for the service have been submitted and approved by
the Director of Public Service and the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee.
   Rule 29
      No person except an authorized agent of the Division of Water or the Fire
Department or a person with a special permit shall open or disturb any fire
hydrant or any part thereof or take any water from the hydrant under any
circumstances. In case any damage is done to a fire hydrant by any person, he
or she shall, upon demand, pay the damage and all cost and expense incurred by
reason thereof. Applicants for connection to the city mains for the purpose of
obtaining a supply of water for a sprinkler system must first furnish plans and
specifications for installation of the same to the Division of Water to be
approved by the Director of Public Service and the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief's designee. If, in his or her opinion, the rules and regulations are
complied with, he or she may authorize the connection to remain unmetered.
Plans or blueprints showing the fire system as completed, with all
measurements, outlets and the like, must be filled with the Division of Water
before water will be allowed to supply the system from the mains of the water
distribution system.
   Rule 30
      Pipes intended for fire protection must not be tapped or used for the
general supply of any building, structure or premises, except for a limited
area sprinkler system. Proper plans or blueprints for limited fire protection
sprinkler system must be submitted to the Division of Water and the Director of
Public Service and the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee for approval.
All limited area sprinkler systems must have a backflow prevention device
covered by §
1040.07.
   Rule 31
      In case of fire the Fire Department shall have the right to use any
hydrant, hose, pipe or other connection wholly or in part from any pipe used
for fire protection.
   (g)   Water rates; rate period; charges. 
   Rule 32
      (1)   A written application shall be required from each customer before
connecting service for the customer, or transferring an account to his or her
name, which application, when duly accepted by the Division of Water, shall
constitute the agreement between the customer and the city. A fee of $5.00
shall be charged for all applications.
      (2)   A.   All meters one inch or smaller shall be read monthly, and
customers shall be billed monthly. Billings rendered without a meter reading
shall be based on estimated monthly consumption. Estimated billings shall be
reconciled during months when the billings rendered are based on actual meter
readings.
         B.   All meters larger than one inch shall be read monthly, and
customers shall be billed each month.
         C.   Service to private fire protection facilities shall be billed
monthly. All accounts are due and payable from the first to the fifteenth day
of the month.
      (3)   Any individual or business entity that is using or consuming water
as supplied by the Municipal Water System of the City of Shelby, Ohio, shall be
billed for the Water Treatment Plan Construction Fund charge in accordance with
the terms of Rules 35 and 37 herein below. In the case of individuals or
business entities whose water usage or consumption is not separately metered
and who, therefore, receive no water billings, the appropriate charge for the
Water Treatment Plant Construction Fund shall be added to their utility bill.
   Rule 33
   Production Cost Adjuster
      The Production Cost Adjuster shall be derived every three months by
dividing (1) the past 12 months cost of electricity and natural gas utilized at
the Water Treatment Plant, the cost of all chemicals used in the water
treatment process, the cost of lab testing and supplies, and cost of the sludge
removal process {'{'}the sludge removal portion of the Production Cost Adjuster
may be adjusted every three months, based on the projected cost of
transportation and disposal of sludge; a reconciliation of over and under
recovery of sludge removal costs will be taken forward to the next disposal
period as a debit or credit to these costs and spread out evenly over the
period between actual disposal{'}'} (hereinafter referred to as “previous 12
months cost”) by (2) the sum of the past 12 months cubic feet of water billed
(hereinafter referred to as “previous 12 months cubic feet billed”).
 
Previous 12 months’ cost (numerator)              = Production Cost Adjuster
Previous 12 months’ cubic feet billed (denominator)
 
   Rule 34
   Project and Equipment Rider
      The Project and Equipment Rider portion of the water charges shall be
collected and utilized for capital projects and equipment within the city’s
water facility and shall include projects and/or equipment necessary for the
operation of the entire utility and its infrastructure. The rates and charges
set forth in the current city water rate schedule may be increased for  the
purpose of providing funding for projects and equipment purchases in
furtherance of the city’s goal to provide the city’s water utility consumers
with the most economic, environmentally sound and reliable production of water.
   Rule 35
   Rates for Customers with One Inch or Smaller Water Meter
 
Amount Consumed in Cubic Billing Unit    Base     PCA      PER      2/28/2014
Feet
First 200                Min. Charge                                $9.10584
Next 1,800               per 100 cu. ft. $2.56334 $0.65663 $1.47191 $4.69188
Next 17,000              per 100 cu. ft. $1.73496 $0.65663 $0.73596 $3.12755
Next 461,000             per 100 cu. ft. $1.09473 $0.65663 $0.32748 $2.07884
Over 480,000             per 100 cu. ft. $1.09473 $0.62380 $0.32748 $2.04601
 
      (1)   “Residential” customers who are billed under Rule 35 shall pay a
charge of $5.50 per meter per month. This charge shall be shown on the billing
statement and shall be designated as Water Treatment Plant Construction Fund.
In addition, a Customer Service charge of $5 shall be paid per meter per month.
This charge shall be shown on the billing statement and shall be designated as
Customer Charge.
      (2)   “Commercial” customers who are billed under Rule 35 shall pay a
charge of $6.50 per meter per month. This charge shall be shown on the billing
statement and shall be designated as for the Water Treatment Plant Construction
Fund.  “Commercial” shall be defined as any structure with a one-inch or
smaller water meter and that has a business that either is located in that
structure or is served with water from the meter located in that structure. In
addition, a Customer Service charge of $7.50 shall be paid per meter per month.
This charge shall be shown on the billing statement and shall be designated as
Customer Charge.
   Rule 36
   Rates for Elderly or Totally Disabled
      Available to residential customers who are served through individual
meters of one inch or smaller that meet age, income and other prerequisites as
determined by the Director of Public Service, subject to approval by Council.
 
Amount Consumed in Cubic Billing Unit    Base     PCA      PER      2/28/2014
Feet
First 300                Min. Charge                                $7.30553
Next 1,800               per 100 cu. ft. $2.56334 $0.65663 $1.47191 $4.69188
Next 17,000              per 100 cu. ft. $1.73496 $0.65663 $0.73596 $3.12755
Over 19,100              per 100 cu. ft  $1.09473 $0.65663 $0.32812 $2.07948
 
      Customers billed under Rule 36 shall pay a charge of $3.50 per meter per
month. This charge shall be shown on the billing statement and shall be
designated as Water Treatment Plant Construction Fund. In addition, a Customer
Service charge of $3 shall be paid per meter per month. This charge shall be
shown on the billing statement and shall be designated as Customer Charge.
   Rule 37
   Rates for Customers with Water Meter Larger than One Inch
 
Amount Consumed in Cubic Billing Unit    Base     PCA      PER      2/28/2014
Feet
First 500                Min. Charge                                $18.08357
Next 1,500               per 100 cu. ft. $2.87674 $0.65663 $1.47191 $5.00528
Next 18,000              per 100 cu. ft. $1.73110 $0.65663 $0.73596 $3.12369
Next 460,000             per 100 cu. ft. $1.03829 $0.65663 $0.32812 $2.02304
Over 480,000             per 100 cu. ft. $1.03829 $0.62380 $0.32812 $1.99021
 
      (1)   Customers billed under Rule 37 shall pay a charge of $7.00 per
meter per month. This charge shall be shown on the billing statement and shall
be designated as Water Treatment Plant Construction Fund. In addition, a
Customer Service charge of $15 shall be paid per meter per month. This charge
shall be shown on the billing statement and shall be designated as Customer
Charge.
      (2)   The lowest rate charged per cubic foot of water shall reflect the
actual cost of production, plus 2%. This cost shall be reviewed annually and
shall be adjusted accordingly.
      (3)   Moneys collected for the Water Treatment Plant Construction Fund
shall be in effect until such time that the improvements have been made. The
moneys collected and spent on improvements shall be reviewed annually by City
Council to determine the need for collection.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing, base rates for Rule 35 or Commercial base
rates for Rule 36 Elderly or Totally Disabled, and base rates for Rule 37
customers with water meters larger than one inch shall increase by 2% on
January 1, 2014 and 2% on January 1, 2015.
   Rule 38
   Rates for Water Service to Private Fire Protection Facilities
      (1)   For service to a sprinkler system, a system having inside hose
cabinets or other similar facilities that are supplied from an unmetered
source:
 
Amount Consumed in Cubic Feet Billing Unit      Effective 2/28/2014
10,000 and less               Minimum           $2.99
10,001 - 30,000               per 1,000 cu. ft. $0.29
Over 30,000                   per 1,000 cu. ft. $0.22
 
      (2)   For service to inside standpipes without sprinkler system, hose
cabinets or other similar facilities:
 
Tap Size (from main) Billing Unit Effective 2/28/2014
4 inch or less       each         $17.50
6 inch               each         $29.17
8 inch               each         $51.05
10 inch              each         $72.91
 
      (3)   For a service to a private fire hydrant:
 
Type                       Billing Unit Effective 2/28/2014
3-way with steamer fitting each         $29.17
 
   Rule 39
   Rates for Multiple Units Receiving Water Through One Meter
 
Units in Cubic Feet Cu. Ft. Minimum Minimum Charge per Month Effective 1/1/2014
2  250 $9.00
3  300 $11.09
4  350 $12.88
5  400 $14.57
6  450 $16.31
7  500 $18.01
8  550 $19.71
9  600 $21.37
10 650 $22.99
11 700 $24.64
12 750 $26.25
13 800 $27.79
14 850 $29.35
15 900 $30.86
16 950 $32.36
 
      All water consumed over the minimum shall be billed using rates under
Rule 35.
   Rule 40
      There shall be no charge for water at the following locations: Copperweld
Field, Connelly-Gibson Field, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the
Sutter-Roush Rooms, the Municipal Utilities Office, Water Works Ball Field,
W.W. Skiles Stadium and the city parks system. The Division of Water may, at
its discretion, install meters at the above locations in order to measure water
usage. Furthermore, the Director of Public Service and the Board of Park
Commissioners may enter into annual agreements for the use of water at Seltzer
Pool.
   Rule 41
      All water taps into the city water supply shall be charged a $569.53 tap-
in fee. All three- fourths of an inch water tap shall cost an additional
$284.77. All other sizes up to and including two inches shall be charged an
additional fee of time and material, but no less than $284.77. These costs
shall be paid by the owner or developer and shall be paid before permanent
water service is received. Taps up to and including two inches will be brought
to the curb and the shut-off will be made at the main in the street. Taps from
there into the property are the responsibility of the customer. If a two-inch
tap is to be made with a corporation and curb-stop, the line to be tapped must
be at least an eight-inch line. All other two-inch and larger size taps will be
made with a tapping sleeve and valve, with the shut-off at the main in the
street. Taps over two inches made by owner or developer shall just be charged
the tap-in fee of $569.53.
   Rule 42
      No water service shall be provided to any new construction until a water
meter is set and operable.
   Rule 43
      Beginning January 1, 2008, and on every January 1 thereafter, the Rules
38, 39, 41 and 45 and the Minimum, the Base, and the Project and Equipment
Rider portion of the effective rates for Rules 35, 36, and 37 shall be adjusted
upwards by a factor equal to 100% of the most current Consumer Price Index
(CPI), as determined by the government of the United States, if the number is
positive (+). If the CPI is negative (-), then the effective rates as stated
above shall be adjusted downward by a factor equal to 100% of the CPI. In no
event shall the effective rates as stated above be adjusted upward by more than
3% in any one year.
   (h)   Additional charges to consumers outside city limits.
   Rule 44
      All consumers located outside of the city limits shall have applied to
the regular charge listed in division (g) hereof a 10% additional charge to the
minimum meter usage and service charges.
   Rule 45
      Bulk water is available to individuals having the means to transport such
water. Bulk water is sold in 1,000-gallon increments. Persons wishing to
purchase bulk water must obtain a ticket from the Shelby Public Utilities
Office, 23 East Main Street. Each ticket entitles the purchaser to 1,000
gallons of water. Bulk water is to be loaded at the Shelby Water Treatment
Plant, 115 North Gamble Street.
 
Rates for Bulk Water                         Effective 2/1/2012
In lots of less than 100 tickets, per ticket $12.23
In lots of 100 or more tickets, per ticket   $7.1489
 
   (i)   Turnoff for violation.
   Rule 46
      In case it becomes necessary to turn off the water because of any
violation of any rule or regulation of the Division of Water, a charge of
$30.00 shall be made for turning water off or on.
   Rule 47
      All water bills become due and payable on the first day of the month of
issue and must be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month of issue. A
10% penalty shall be applied to all unpaid bills after the fifteenth day of the
month. Bills remaining unpaid after the twentieth day of the month may be shut
off without further notice. When water is shut off, it shall not be turned on
again until the amount of all charges, plus penalty, is paid in full together
with an additional charge of $30.00 to reimburse the Division of Water for the
expense sustained in shutting off the water. Failure to receive notice by mail
shall not excuse consumers from paying the water bill. No person having a
delinquent account with the Division of Water shall be given water service at
any other service or location until all delinquent accounts have been paid in
full.
   Rule 48
      Meters damaged by abuse, misuse or any act of carelessness shall be
replaced by the Division of Water at the expense of the consumer or property
owner to include charges for labor and material.
   Rule 49
      No charge for water service shall be rendered for less than one month,
and in the absence of metered consumption for that period, the minimum charge
for one month shall be rendered.
   Rule 50
      When a meter is removed for repairs, the service shall be charged the
average usage for the time the meter is out of service.
   Rule 51
      Parties desiring water service for a period of less than 30 days, if it
is metered measurement, will be charged the regular rate plus $25.00 to cover
the cost of setting and removing the meter.
   Rule 52
      Service pipes between the curb-stop and the meter on the inside of the
building, dwelling, trailer or apparatus containing the meter shall be laid not
less than four feet below the surface of the ground, and the material used for
the service pipe as stated in Rule 20. Service pipes shall not be laid in any
trench used for other purposes, unless they are laid on a shelf, not less than
12 inches wide, cut in the side of the trench.
   Rule 53
      The stopcock or shut-off at the curb shall be equipped with a cast iron
curb or valve box with a standard cover marked “water” and shall be placed
between the curb and the sidewalk, space permitting, or set in the sidewalk.
All service or valve boxes shall be set flush with the sidewalk or grade. The
same shall be kept clean from dirt or other obstacles that would interfere with
the shutting off or turning on of water. No curb or valve box shall be set in a
private driveway.
   Rule 54
      Each residence or building shall have a separate and distinct stopcock,
located outside the premises, opposite the premises and on a public right of
way.
   (j)   Authority; penalties for violation; responsibility of consumer. 
   Rule 55
      Ohio R.C. §§ 4933.22 and 4933.99 shall be enforced for the protection of
the Municipal Water System and the city.
   Rule 56
      Whenever in these rules it is stated that notice will be given the
consumer, it means that notice left or sent to the premises where water is
consumed shall be sufficient notification.
   Rule 57
      The Division of Water tries to give proper notice of water assessments
but by law cannot guarantee the delivery of water charges by mail. Owners
buying or selling properties should see that proper transfer of ownership is
made at the office of the Division of Water and that water charges are paid to
the date of transfer of title. The Division of Water will make every possible
effort to collect water charges or assessments as promptly as the nature of its
business permits, but no consumer or owner of property is relieved from the
obligation of unpaid water bills or assessments that may be unpaid through
failure of the Division of Water to make collections as provided by its rules
and regulations.
   Rule 58
      For any check for which there are insufficient funds, there shall be a
charge of $25.00 in addition to any other charge, penalty or fee outlined in
this chapter. In the event that the insufficiently-funded check is due to a
bank error, this charge may be waived after receipt of written clarification
from the customer’s banking institution.
   Rule 59
   (1)   A deposit of $100.00 shall be for the following utility service when
combined with electric and/or sewer:
      A.   Water.
   (2)   A deposit of $150.00 shall be for the following utility service:
      A.   Water only.
   (3)   A deposit not exceeding $300.00 for a combined utility service of
electric, water, and sewer for residential customers or 150% of an estimated
average bill for commercial and industrial customers (unless the service is
temporary), may be required of the customer at any time, or from time to time
before or after service is commenced. Deposit criteria will be affected by but
not limited to:
      A.   Past general credit history;
      B.   Past payment history (with the utility);
      C.   End use of service; and
      D.   Duration of service.
   (4)   The utility office shall have a reasonable time in which to ascertain
that the obligations of the customer have been fully performed before being
required to return any deposit. The deposit shall be credited to the customer’s
account when payments have been made by the due date on 12 consecutive months,
unless the customer’s account has been terminated. Where the account has been
terminated, any remaining deposit not used to credit the account shall be
directly reimbursed to the customer within 30 calendar days.
   (5)   There shall be no interest paid or accrued on deposits.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 17-2012, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 8-2013,
passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 34-2013, passed 11-4-2013; Ord. 28-2016, passed 12-5-
2016; Ord. 14-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
§ 1040.05  CONNECTION OF PRIVATE, AUXILIARY AND EMERGENCY SUPPLIES WITH PUBLIC
SUPPLIES.
   No officer or employee having charge of or being employed in the maintenance
and operation of a public water supply and waterworks system, and no other
person, shall establish or permit to be established any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply may enter the supply or distribution system, unless the private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the
supply has been approved by both the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and
the Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.06  WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (a)   All city water may be furnished to lots or parcels of land outside the
city only upon written application of the developers or lot owners outside the
city approved for the purposes of city water by the Director of Public Service
and formally accepted by Council.
   (b)   This written application shall contain the following information and
statements:
      (1)   The desired city utilities shall be constructed at no cost to the
city and that the same will be constructed in accordance with the plans,
details and specifications approved by the Director of Public Service subject
to inspection by the city;
      (2)   There shall also be delivered to the Director of Finance and Public
Record an annexation petition for the property binding upon the owners or
developers of the property and their heirs and assigns, as persons acquiring
title to the real estate from the owners or developers, together with all
necessary petitions for improvements as provided for in the City Subdivision
Regulations, which petition shall also be binding on the owners or developers
and their heirs and assigns acquiring title to the real estate from the owners
or developers;
      (3)   The annexation petition shall be presented to the County
Commissioners and the annexation completed within six months, or the same,
together with all petition for improvements not completed within that period,
shall be recorded in the Miscellaneous Docket, Richland County, Ohio, the same
to be added to and/or made a part of any and all future annexation proceedings
for any and all properties adjacent thereto and to remain in full force and
effect until the annexation is completed into the city; and
      (4)   The improvement petitions for any and all improvements not
completed by the owner or developer shall also be in full force and effect and
binding upon the owners and developers, and their heirs and assigns, as the
owners of the real estate, and at the discretion of Council may be acted upon
for a period of ten years after the annexation of the territory is completed.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.07  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   Any backflow prevention device required by §§ 3745-5-05 et seq. of the
Ohio Administrative Code, as amended, shall be of the model or construction
approved by the water purveyor and the Director of Public Service.
   (b)   Any backflow prevention device required by O.A.C. §§ 3745-5-05 et
seq., as amended, shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by
the water purveyor and shall be installed by and at the expense of the water
consumer. In addition, any backflow prevention device required by O.A.C. §
3745-5-05(B) and (C), as amended, shall be installed at a location and in a
manner approved by the Director as required by R.C. § 6109.13.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the consumer, on any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by O.A.C. §§ 3745-5-05 et seq., as
amended, are installed, to have thorough inspections and operational tests made
of the devices at such intervals and in such manner as may be reasonably
required by the water purveyor or the Director. These inspections and tests
shall be at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by the
water purveyor or a person approved by the water purveyor as qualified to
inspect and test backflow prevention devices. It shall be the duty of the water
purveyor to see that these tests and inspections are made. These devices shall
be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the consumer whenever
they are found to be defective. Records of the inspections, tests, repairs and
overhaul shall be kept by the consumer and made available to the water
purveyor.
   (d)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the water purveyor or
the Director prior to the effective date of this section and which are properly
maintained shall, except for inspection, testing and maintenance requirements,
be excluded from the requirements of divisions (a) and (b) hereof if the water
purveyor and the Director are assured that the devices will satisfactorily
protect the water system.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.08  FLUORIDATION.
   The Mayor, as Director of Public Service, and the Superintendent of Water
are hereby authorized to fluoridate the drinking water of the city as per the
mandatory specifications of the Ohio Department of Health and the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.09  OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES IN WATERWAYS.
   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited on any
land owned or leased or controlled by him or her, which is within the city
water supply watershed area, as hereinafter described, or any watercourse
tributary thereto, or on or under the surface of the ground at any point from
which contamination may reach the reservoir of the city or any watercourse
tributary thereto or into the Blackfork of the Mohican River, or any
watercourse tributary thereto, any human excreta, offal, urine, the contents of
any chemical commode, kitchen waste, laundry waste, slop sink waste, contents
or drainage of sewage or septic tanks, dead animals, garbage or refuse or
offensive, putrid or polluting materials of any kind, including industrial and
chemical wastes (excepting therefrom any roof and foundation drainage into the
surface of the ground), or into any excavation, land drain or watercourse
draining into the reservoir of the city.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.10  DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   No person on any land owned, leased or controlled by him or her, which is
within the city water supply watershed area, as hereinafter described, shall
construct, erect, install, improve, maintain, utilize, use or otherwise
improvise, or permit any other person to do so, any household sewage disposal
system or method other than on-site disposal facilities which utilize
absorption and/or percolation methods and which does not permit any surface
discharge of wastes or effluent flows from the disposal facility or method or
cause or allow flow across property of any other owner.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.11  DESCRIPTION OF WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED AREA.
   Being a part of Sharon Township, Jackson Township, and Springfield Township,
Richland County, Ohio, and being more particularly described as follows:
      Beginning for the same at a point which is the intersection of the
centerline of the Blackfork of the Mohican River and the north line of Section
Seventeen of Sharon Township; thence easterly along the north line of Section
Seventeen to the centerline of the Chessie System Railroad; thence
southeasterly along such railroad centerline and into Section Sixteen of
Jackson Township to a point at the centerline of George Hawk Road (Township
Highway No. 212); thence southerly along the centerline of the road to a point
at the centerline of Myers Road (County Highway No. 201) which is the north
line of Section Twenty-Eight and the south line of Section Twenty-One of
Jackson Township; thence easterly along such centerline to a point at the
centerline of Springmill North Road (Township Highway No. 208); thence
southerly along the centerline of the road to a point at the centerline of
Amoy-Pavonia Road (County Highway No. 90) which is also the north line of
Section Thirty-Five of Jackson Township; thence easterly along the centerline
of the road to a point at the centerline of Springmill North Road which is the
northeast corner of Section Thirty-Five; thence southerly along the East line
of Section Thirty-Five of Jackson Township and the east line of Section Two of
Springfield Township (centerline of Lexington-Springmill Road (County Highway
No. 133)) to a point at the southeast corner of Section Two; thence westerly
long the south line of Section Two of Springfield Township to a point at the
northeast corner of the Northwest Quarter of Section Eleven of Springfield
Township; thence southerly along the half-section line of Section Eleven and
Section Fourteen of Springfield Township to a point at the southeast corner of
the Northwest Quarter of Section Fourteen; thence westerly along the east-west
half section lines of Section Fourteen and Section Fifteen of Springfield
Township to a point at the centerline of State Route Thirty; thence
northwesterly along the centerline of State Route Thirty to a point at the
centerline of Mabee Road; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Mabee
Road to a point at its intersection with the centerline of State Route Thirty;
thence westerly along the centerline of State Route Thirty to a point at its
intersection with State Route Three Hundred Fourteen; thence northerly along
the centerline of State Route Three Hundred Fourteen to a point at its
intersection with the centerline of Snodgrass Road (Township Highway No. 165)
(which is also the south line of Section Eight of Springfield Township); thence
westerly along the centerline of Snodgrass Road to a point at the north-south
half section line of Section Eight of Springfield Township; thence northerly
along the north-south half section line to a point on the north line of Section
Eight (the centerline of Beam Road-County Highway No. 51); thence westerly
along the centerline of Beam Road to a point at the southwest corner of Section
Five of Springfield Township; thence northerly along the west line of Section
Five to a point at the northwest corner of such section and the southwest
corner of Section Thirty-Two of Sharon Township; thence northerly along the
west line of Section Thirty-Two to a point at the east-west half section line
of Section Thirty-Two and Section Thirty-One of Sharon Township; thence
westerly along the east-west half section line to a point at the southwest
corner of the Northwest Quarter of Section Thirty-Three; thence northerly along
the west line of Section Thirty-One to a point at the Northwest Corner of the
Section and the centerline of Stine Road (Township Highway No. 169); thence
westerly along the centerline of Stine Road and the south line of Section
Twenty-Five to a point at its intersection with the centerline of Finnegan Road
(Township Highway No. 176); thence northerly along the centerline of such road
and the west line of Section Twenty-Five and of Section Twenty-Four to a point
at the centerline of Funk Road (County Highway No. 180) and the Northwest
corner of Section Twenty-Four; thence easterly along the centerline of the road
and the north line of Section Twenty-Four to a point at the Southwest corner of
Section Eighteen; thence northerly along the west line of such section to a
point at the centerline of Stentz Road (Township Highway No. 181); thence
easterly along the centerline of the road to the centerline of the Conrail
Corporation Railroad; thence northeasterly along such centerline to a point at
its intersection with the north line of Section Eighteen; thence easterly along
the north line of Section Eighteen and of Section Seventeen to the point of
beginning.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 1040.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first
offense and shall be fined not more than $100. For any subsequent offense the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, the offender shall be liable for any damage,
destruction or cost incurred by the city because of the offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1040.06 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 6-18-2007)
CHAPTER 1042:  SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
   
1042.01   Regulations generally
   
1042.02   Definitions
   
1042.03   Duties of the Wastewater Review Commission
   
1042.04   Connections required
   
1042.05   Permit; fee; bond
   
1042.06   Responsibility for costs
   
1042.07   Separate connections
   
1042.08   Construction standards and specifications
   
1042.09   Inspection; street closings
   
1042.10   Sewer builder to be registered
   
1042.11   Storm drainage
   
1042.12   Prohibited discharge
   
1042.13   Limitations on wastewater strength
   
1042.14   Wastewater dischargers
   
1042.15   Special agreements re unusual wastes
   
1042.16   Tampering
   
1042.17   Identification required
   
1042.18   Ohio Sanitary Code adopted
   
1042.19   Sanitary sewer service outside corporate limits
   
1042.20   Photographs required
   
1042.21   Cross-connections between water and sewer systems
   
1042.22   Abandonment of sewer laterals
   
1042.23   Industrial wastewater permitting program
 
   
1042.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Dumping into sewers, ditches, watercourses and the like, see §
660.12
   Power to regulate, construct, see Charter §§
111 et seq.
   Private sewage disposal systems, see
Ch. 1046
   Sewer charges, see
Ch. 1044
   Sewer connections, see Charter §
93
Statutory reference:
   Interference with sewage flow, see R.C. § 4933.24
   Sewerage districts, see R.C. §§ 727.44 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see R.C. § 729.49
§ 1042.01  REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   These rules and regulations shall apply to the sanitary sewage
collection system constructed within and/or without the corporate limits of the
city. Such rules and regulations shall apply from a location at a clean-out
directly inside the inner face of the building wall of each home, building or
structure and shall include house sewer laterals, trunk sewers and interceptor
sewers.
   (b)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To establish a uniform written policy for the control, financing
and management of the city sanitary sewerage system and for the guidance of all
users of same;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater
system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
      (3)   To prevent introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater
system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass
through the system into the receiving waters; and
      (4)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985)
§ 1042.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Act” or “the Act.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   (b)   “Approval authority.” The State of Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency (OEPA).
   (c)   “Authorized” or “duly authorized representative of the user.”
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         A.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         B.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3), above, may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   (d)   “Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD).” The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20° C, expressed as a concentration, milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
   (e)   “Best Management Practices (BMP).” Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, practices and
management plans to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
waste disposal, drainage from raw materials storage or an alternative means of
complying with, or in place of certain established effluent limits.
   (f)   “Building drain.” The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer lateral beginning at a clean-out directly inside the inner face of the
building wall.
   (g)   “Bypass.” The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of a user's treatment facility.
   (h)   “Categorical Pretreatment Standard” or “Categorical Standard.” Any
regulation specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be
discharged into a POTW by specific industrial discharges that appear in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (i)   “Categorical Industrial User (CIU).” An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   (j)   “City.” The City of Shelby, County of Richland, State of Ohio. Also,
for the purposes of
Chapter 1042 - Sewer Regulations, means the Superintendent, as charged with the
duties and responsibilities of this chapter.
   (k)   “City Building Inspector.” The person employed and authorized by the
city to inspect construction of residential buildings including the
installation of house and sewer lateral and plumbing.
   (l)   “Chemical Oxygen Demand” or “COD.” A measure of the oxygen required to
oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   (m)   “Control authority.” The City of Shelby.
   (n)   “Daily maximum.” The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   (o)   “Daily maximum limit.” The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   (p)   “Director of Public Service.” The Mayor or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   (q)   “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).” The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, the Ohio EPA acting as the duly authorized official of
said agency.
   (r)   “Existing source.” Any source of discharge that is not a "new source."
   (s)   “Garbage.” Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   (t)   “Grab sample.” A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.
   (u)   “House sewer lateral” or “building sewer lateral.” The extension from
the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
   (v)   “Indirect discharge” or “discharge.” The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
   (w)   “Industrial Discharge Permit.” A permit issued by the city, to an
industrial user that is a source of an indirect discharge, with the terms and
conditions by which the industrial user must comply.
   (x)   “Industrial user.” A source of indirect discharge.
   (y)   “Industrial waste.” Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.
   (z)   “Instantaneous limit.” The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   (aa)   “Interference.” A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with
another discharge, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, causes a violation of city's NPDES permit, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal.
   (bb)   “Local limit.” Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the city upon users or commercial facilities as listed in §
1042.13 to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in
40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   (cc)   “Natural outlet.” Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
   (dd)   “New source:”
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the date of passage of this chapter, provided that:
         A.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         B.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         C.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of divisions (1)B. orC. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this division has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         A.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program;
            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
         B.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
division.
   (ee)   “NPDES.” National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
program as administered by the Ohio EPA.
   (ff)   “Noncontact cooling water.” Water used for cooling that does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   (gg)   “O and M” or “O&M.”  Operation and Maintenance.
   (hh)   “Pass-through.” A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   (ii)   “Person.” Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
joint stock company, trust, association, society, group or other legal entity.
This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
   (jj)   “pH.” A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.
   (kk)   “Pollutant.” Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   (ll)   “Pretreatment.” The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of,
introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
   (mm)   “Pretreatment requirements.” Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
   (nn)   “Pretreatment standards.” Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   (oo)   “Prohibited discharge standards.” Absolute prohibitions against the
discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in §
1042.12 of this chapter.
   (pp)   “Properly shredded garbage.” The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   (qq)   “Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).” A treatment works, as
defined by § 212 of the Act, which is owned by the city. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature
and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   (rr)   “Public sewer.” A sewer controlled by the city.
   (ss)   “Sanitary sewer.” A sewer which carries wastewater and wastes and to
which storm, surface and ground waters shall not be admitted.
   (tt)   “Sewage.” Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.)
   (uu)   “Sewer.” A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
   (vv)   “Significant Industrial User (SIU).” Is:
      (1)   An industrial user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
(CIU); or
      (2)   An industrial user that:
         A.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down
wastewater);
         B.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         C.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (ww)   “Significant Non-Compliance (SNC).”  An industrial user is considered
in significant noncompliance if it has a violation that meets the criteria in
divisions (3), (4), or (8) listed below. A Significant Industrial User (SIU) is
considered in significant noncompliance if its violation meets any of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter at any permitted monitoring point during a six-month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter at any permitted monitoring point during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
described in city ordinances that the Superintendent determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, reports on compliance with compliance
schedules, or any other reports required by the control authority;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, including a violation
of BMPs, that the control authority determines adversely affects the operation
or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
   (xx)   “Slug load” or “Slug discharge.” Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in §
1042.12 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   (yy)   “Storm sewer or storm drain.” A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
   (zz)   “Storm water.” Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
   (aaa)   “Superintendent.” The person designated by the city to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with the duties and responsibilities
by this chapter. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the
superintendent.
   (bbb)   “Total Suspended Solids (TSS)” or “Suspended Solids.” The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   (ccc)   “User or “industrial user.” A source of non-domestic, indirect
wastewater discharge to the POTW.
   (ddd)   “Wastewater.” Liquid and water-carried wastes and sewage from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
   (eee)   “Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP)” or “Treatment Plant.” That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage
and industrial waste.
   (fff)   “Wastewater Review Commission.”
      (1)   A commission consisting of three persons to include the following:
a member of Council, the POTW superintendent, and a representative of industry.
The following is a description of the terms of office and the appointment
procedure of the Wastewater Review Commission.
      (2)   The terms of office of the Councilmember and the POTW
superintendent shall be for the length of time they hold their respective
positions. The term of office of the industry representative shall be for two
years concurrent with the term of office of the Mayor.
      (3)   The industry member shall be appointed by the Mayor; the
appointment shall be confirmed by Council.
      (4)   The Council member shall automatically serve as the Commission's
Chairperson. A Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary shall be elected from the
Commission's membership.
   (ggg)   “Watercourse.” A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985; Ord. 6-2016, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 27-2017,
passed 12-4-2017)
§ 1042.03  DUTIES OF THE WASTEWATER REVIEW COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Wastewater Review Commission shall review all pending and existing
legislation pertaining to sewer regulations and make recommendations to
Council.
   (b)   The Commission shall review requests, hold hearings as required, and
recommend appropriate actions to Council.
   (c)   Any entity may file with the Commission a written request for
modifications and/or variations as applied to its respective situation.
Requested variances shall be acted upon by the Commission and recommendations
made to Council as soon as possible but no later than 60 days after the date of
the request.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985)
§ 1042.04  CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   Each newly constructed home, building or structure, if on real property
located within 200 feet of the public sanitary sewer, shall make a connection
into the sanitary sewer and extend the connecting sewer prior to the occupancy
or use of the building or structure. Each home, building or structure, existing
and occupied prior to the construction of the public sanitary sewer, and if
situated on property located within 200 feet of the sanitary sewer, shall make
connection into the sanitary sewer and extend the connecting sewer within 90
consecutive days after being notified to make the connection. No person shall
dispose of sanitary sewage wastes on property located within 200 feet of a
public sanitary sewer except into that sewer.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.05  PERMIT; FEE; BOND.
   (a)   The owner of each premises desiring a connection into the sanitary
sewer system shall first make application for a sewer tap connection permit in
the office of the Director of Utilities located in the Shelby Municipal
Utilities Office. A separate permit is required for each home, building or
structure desiring a connection. The applicant shall furnish house number, lot
number and such other information as may be required to properly identify the
exact location of the property.
   (b)   Each application for a sewer tap connection permit shall be
accompanied by a payment of $75 for each unit of a residential property and
$150 for any other building used for commercial or industrial use. This payment
is not refundable and shall defray, in part, the cost of issuing the permit and
inspecting the tap connection during construction.
   (c)   In addition to the cost of the permit, each application for a sewer
tap connection which necessitates the damaging of a pavement, curb, sidewalk or
other public property shall be accompanied by a deposit in the form of bond,
cash or check payable to the city. The amount shall be based upon the current
established construction schedule on file in the office of the Director of
Finance and Public Record and be constructed in accordance with approved,
established standard drawings on file in the office of the Director of Finance
and Public Record.
   (d)   All material must be in accordance with the latest issue of the State
of Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material Specifications.
   (e)   In the event that the applicant restores the pavement, curb, sidewalk
or other damaged public property to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Streets and Sewers, the full amount of the deposit shall be refunded at the
expiration of a six-month period. In the event that the applicant does not
restore the pavement, curb, sidewalk and other damaged public property, then
the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers shall cause the same to be restored
and shall deduct the cost of this restoration from the deposit and any
remaining amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.
(Ord. 27-99, passed 6-21-1999; Ord. 16-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1042.06  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   (a)   Owner.  The house sewer lateral, also called "building sewer lateral"
or "house lateral connection" or "connecting lateral sewer", extending from a
building drain to the public sewer, including wye connection fitting, is
considered the private property of the owner of the premises being served and
all construction, installation and maintenance costs of same shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
   (b)   City. All public sewers, defined as those having house sewer laterals
connected to them, branch sewers, main sewers and interceptor sewers are public
property and all costs for maintaining same are the responsibility of the city.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980; Ord. 13-2005, passed 5-2-2005)
§ 1042.07  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   Each house, mobile home, apartment, commercial building or other structure
shall have a separate lateral connection into the public sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.08  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   House sewer laterals shall not be less than six inches in diameter.
All joints shall be watertight.
      (1)   House sewer laterals from the main to the owner's residence shall
be one of the following materials:
         A.   Vitrified sewer pipes meeting the latest issue of the
requirements of the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Designation
C-700, with bell and spigot joints, including a compression-type gasket
conforming to the material and testing requirements of ASTM Designation C-425;
         B.   PVC sewer pipe manufactured in accordance with the most current
revision of ASTM Designation D 3034 (SDR 35); or
         C.   ABS plastic solid wall pipe, meeting the requirements of the most
current revision of ASTM Designation D 2751.
      (2)   The appropriate Fernaco flexible coupling or approved equal adaptor
shall be used to connect different pipe materials.
   (b)   Whenever possible, the house sewer lateral shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. For each building there
shall be a separate six-inch minimum sewer connection, which shall extend from
the main sewer to within five feet of the building, at which point a Fernaco
(or equal) transition fitting will be installed and connected to Schedule 40
pipe.  Once inside a structure a cleanout will be installed flush with the
finish floor.
   (c)   No building sewer lateral laid parallel to any bearing wall shall be
installed within three feet of the wall, which might thereby be weakened. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The house sewer
lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings.
   (d)   House sewer laterals shall have a minimum slope of one-eighth inch per
foot laid to a straight line and grade. Connections to the public sewer shall
be made at wye (or tee used if drop in from top only) fittings installed for
this purpose. If a wye or tee fitting is not available, connection into the
public sewer shall be made by using an approved manufactured watertight saddle
or flexible watertight couplings (Fernaco or approved equal). The sewer digger
shall make arrangements with the City Building Inspector to inspect the tap.
Long radius bends shall be used, as required, at the wye or tee fittings. The
pipe shall be laid on six inches of crushed stone bedding material conforming
to size No. 67 of Table 703-1 of the State of Ohio Department of Transportation
Construction and Material Specifications.
   (e)   After the bedding material is placed in the bottom of the trench, the
pipe shall be laid in the bedding material with care being taken to insure that
the bottom of the pipe is resting on the bedding material for its full length.
The pipe shall then be adjusted to the proper elevation by adding or removing
bedding material as required.
   (f)   No backfilling over completed work shall be done without the
permission of the Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers or the
Director of Public Service or his or her designee.
   (g)   After the piping installation is approved by the Superintendent of
Wastewater Treatment and Sewers or his or her designee, it shall be backfilled
to a depth of at least six inches above the top of the pipe with granular
material conforming to that specified for bedding material. This initial
backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to the satisfaction of the Superintendent
of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers or his or her designee with precaution taken
so that no misalignment and no change in grade will occur during the
backfilling operation.
   (h)   The balance of the trench located outside of pavement limits shall be
backfilled with the excavated materials free of large stones or lumps. All
excavations within the limits of street pavement, parking areas or public
drives shall be backfilled with gravel backfill compacted in place. Gravel
backfill shall meet with the approval of the Superintendent of Wastewater
Treatment and Sewers or his or her designee prior to its installation. Pavement
shall be replaced in accordance with Standard Drawing No. 2 on file in the
office of the Director of Finance and Public Record. All excavations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
(Ord. 52-98, passed 11-16-1998; Ord. 74-2000, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 1042.09  INSPECTION; STREET CLOSINGS.
   (a)   The property owner or his or her designated representative shall
notify the office of the Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers two
days, excluding Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays, in advance of the expected
date for making the connection into the public sanitary sewer. Both the sewer
lateral connection and the house sewer lateral pipe shall be left exposed for
the inspection and approval of the Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and
Sewers or his or her authorized representative. Upon approval, the
Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers or his or her authorized
representative will authorize the placing of backfill over the connection and
pipe, at which time the house sewer lateral may be used for its intended
purpose.
   (b)   No sewer work in a street right-of-way shall be started until the
Police, Fire and Street Departments have been notified of the street closing.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980; Ord. 74-2000, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 1042.10  SEWER BUILDER TO BE REGISTERED.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of making connections to the
city sewers or drains or lateral connections, or making repairs thereto within
the city, unless he or she has registered the business in the city. The
registration shall not be approved until the applicant has paid a registration
fee of $50 for the first year or $25 for a renewal each year after, and has
filed with the Director of Public Service evidence of the following:
      (1)   Compensation insurance. The applicant shall procure and shall
maintain during the life of his or her registration worker's compensation
insurance as required by applicable state or territorial law for all of his or
her employees to be engaged in the business of making sewer connections in the
city. In case any class of employees engaged in hazardous work is not protected
under the worker's compensation statute, the applicant shall provide adequate
employer's liability insurance for the protection of such of his or her
employees as are not otherwise protected.
      (2)   Contractor's public liability and property damage insurance and
vehicle liability insurance. The applicant shall procure and shall maintain
during the life of his or her registration contractor's public liability
insurance, contractor's property damage insurance and vehicular liability
insurance in the following amounts: public liability insurance in an amount not
less than $250,000 for injuries, including accidental death to any one person,
and subject to the same limit for each person, in an amount not less than
$500,000 on account of one accident, and contractor's property damage insurance
in an amount not less than $500,000.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service shall keep up-to-date files of
registered sewer diggers, with the addresses of their places of business.
Should a registered sewer digger change the location of his or her place of
business, he or she shall file notice of the change with the Director of Public
Service and the latter shall cause the record to be amended accordingly. Notice
of city instructions or orders shall be communicated to a sewer digger by
written notice to be mailed to him or her by certified mail at the address on
file.
   (c)   If any registered sewer digger violates the provisions of any
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the making of sewer connections, or
fails or refuses to perform any of the duties imposed on him or her by
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the Superintendent of Wastewater
Treatment and Sewers, with the advice of the Director of Law, shall be
authorized to revoke his or her registration, and the sewer digger shall
receive the notice by certified mail.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980; Ord. 74-2000, passed 1-2-2001; Ord. 42-2005,
passed 11-7-2005)
§ 1042.11  STORM DRAINAGE.
   Cooling water, unpolluted process water, roof downspouts, building
foundation drains, yard drains and other storm or ground water collection
facilities shall not be connected to or discharged into the house plumbing or
public sanitary sewer system. Storm water, ground water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be conveyed to open ditches, storm sewers or pavement
gutters by gravity or by means of a sump or lift pump. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the City
Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and Sewers, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980; Ord. 74-2000, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 1042.12  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   National Pretreatment Standard prohibitions. No user shall introduce
or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances,
or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Any solid or viscous substances, (including but not limited to:
garbage that has not been properly shredded, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure)
capable of causing obstruction of the flow to the POTW or resulting in
interference;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (65° C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except as permitted under §
1042.14 of this chapter and at the discharge point designated by the
Superintendent;
   (c)   Local prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no user shall
introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit
and/or cause treatment residue, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process;
      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, motor oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (3)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance, or substances causing the release of noxious or poisonous
gases after discharge into the public sewer system;
      (4)   Any wastes or waters containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant, such as cyanides, radioactive substances,
isotopes and similar materials;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle the
materials at the sewage treatment plant, or having a chlorine demand greater
than 30 mg/l;
      (6)   Wastewater which imparts objectionable color which cannot be
removed by the POTW treatment process, such as, but not limited to: dye wastes
and tanning solutions;
      (7)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, or unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Superintendent;
      (8)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (9)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in an individual wastewater discharge permit;
      (10)   Any wastewater which contains fats, oils, or greases of animal or
vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 50 mg/l;
      (11)   Any slug load or slug discharge as defined in §
1042.02 of this chapter including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a
single discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to
the POTW;
      (12)   Any waters or wastes having a five-day BOD greater than 300 mg/
l by weight, or containing more than 350 mg/l by weight of suspended solids, or
containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described
herein, or having an average daily flow greater than 22% of the average daily
sewage flow of the city, without the review and approval of the Superintendent.
   (d)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985; Ord. 74-2000, passed 1-2-2001; Ord. 27-2017,
passed 12-4-2017)
§ 1042.13  LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
   (a)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
      (1)   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found
in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, where applicable. A
Categorical Industrial User (CIU) may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the CIU can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge
are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (2)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual CIU. This
conversion is at the discretion of the Superintendent.
      (3)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Superintendent
shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (4)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. If such
standards are being applied, the same production or flow value shall be used in
calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.
      (5)   Any SIU must notify the Superintendent at least 30 days in advance
of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge, including any listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which
the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 C.F.R. 403.12
(p).
   (b)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharge to
the POTW shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any
instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations as those in this chapter or any other applicable ordinance.
   (c)   Local Limits. The Superintendent is authorized to establish Local
Limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). These pollutant limits are established to
protect against pass through and interference.
      (1)   No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following concentrations for any of the enumerated materials, exceeding the
following one-day maximums based upon 24-hour average values after a period of
nine months has elapsed from the effective date of this chapter:
 
Pollutant Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic              0.02
Cadmium              0.4
Chromium Hexavalent  None
Chromium - total     3.0
Copper               1.0
Total cyanide        1.0
Lead                 0.5
Mercury              BMP*
Molybdenum           0.5
Nickel               2.0
Selenium             0.02
Silver               1.0
Zinc                 2.0
Fats, oils, & grease 50
BOD5                 300
Suspended solids     350
*BMP Best Management Practices
 
      (2)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose mass
limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations above.
      (3)   The Superintendent may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in an individual wastewater discharge permit, as local limits in
order to achieve the requirements of §
1042.12.
   (d)   Right of revision. The city reserves the right to amend this chapter,
or an individual wastewater discharge permit to provide for different
limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives set forth in §
1042.01.
   (e)   Dilution. No discharge shall increase the use of potable or process
water in any way for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
standards set forth in this chapter. This shall not prohibit the use of
equalization tanks utilized to regulate flows.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985; Ord. 29-97, passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 27-2017,
passed 12-4-2017)
§ 1042.14  WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
   No person shall discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any
sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the city, without having first complied
with the terms of
Chapter 1042. All users proposing to connect to or discharge sewage, industrial
wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall also comply with all terms of this
chapter. All industrial users shall also comply with all provisions and
procedures set forth in the City of Shelby's Industrial Pretreatment Program
(IPP). Industrial users that are required by the Superintendent to obtain an
Industrial Discharge Permit shall also be subject to the terms of §
1042.23.
   (a)   Waste survey and wastewater baseline analyses.
      (1)   Any new user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater and waste products at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge. The Superintendent will provide the Waste Survey
Form (located in the IPP) for this purpose.
      (2)   The Superintendent will also require that a baseline analysis be
performed for all pollutants identified by the user, categorical pollutants the
user is subject to, any pollutants prohibited in §
1042.12, or pollutants regulated in §
1042.13, within 90 days of commencing discharge to the POTW.
      (3)   The city will perform all required baseline sampling and analyses,
with the analysis costs being deferred to the user. Baseline sampling will be
conducted in accordance with the requirements 40 CFR Part 136 and Ohio
Administrative Code 3745-3-06.
      (4)   If compliance with a BMP or a pollution prevention alternative, the
industrial user shall submit documentation to the Superintendent to determine
compliance with the standard.
   (b)   Periodic compliance monitoring.
      (1)   Unless the industrial discharge permit states otherwise, the city
will perform all periodic sampling and analyses, with the analysis costs being
deferred to the user. All significant industrial users will be sampled at least
quarterly. Users subject to reporting requirements in this chapter shall retain
copies of these reports for at least three  years.
      (2)   If any sampling event indicates a violation, the Superintendent
shall notify the user within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
city will repeat the sampling and analysis for the pollutant in violation
within thirty days of becoming aware of the violation.
      (3)   Any existing user shall complete an updated Waste Survey Form
within 30 days if requested by the Superintendent.
   (c)   Pretreatment facilities.
      (1)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply
with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
1042.12 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the State of
Ohio or the Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense.
      (2)   Users must complete and submit all required permit applications and
detailed plans describing such facilities as required by the state, to the
Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the Superintendent and
the state before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the city under the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Users must notify the Superintendent at least 30 days in advance of
any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge, including any listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which
the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 C.F.R. 403.12
(p).
   (d)   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.  The Superintendent
shall evaluate whether each Significant Industrial User (SIU) needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges at least once during the term of each SIU permit or within one
year of being identified as a SIU. The Superintendent may require any user to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other
action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge;
      (4)   Procedures to prevent any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (e)   Oil and grease traps. Oil and grease traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residences. All interception units shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense.
   (f)   Hauled wastewater. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only
at the locations designated by the Superintendent and only with the prior
consent of the Superintendent; who may require the industrial waste hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   (g)   Right of entry for inspection and sampling.
      (1)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of
these ordinances and/or any Industrial Discharge Permit (IDP) order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (2)   Where a user has security measures which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements within its security system so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent shall be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
      (3)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's wastewater operations.
      (4)   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
user, at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated as necessary to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to the
user's premises shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
   (h)   Changes in discharge. All industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent at least 30 days in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted
initial notification under 40 C.F.R. 403.12(p). Significant industrial users
(SIU) shall also notify the Superintendent immediately of any changes at its
facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
   (i)   Significant non-compliance. An industrial user is considered in
significant noncompliance if it has a violation that meets the criteria in
divisions (3), (4), or (8) listed below. A significant industrial user (SIU) is
considered in significant noncompliance if its violation meets any of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits listed in §
1042.13, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter at any permitted monitoring point during
a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including  instantaneous limits;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter at any permitted monitoring point during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
described in §§
1042.12 and
1042.13 that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority under §
1042.23 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, reports on compliance with compliance
schedules, or any other reports required by the control authority;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, including a violation
of BMPs, that the control authority determines adversely affects the operation
or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
      (9)   The Superintendent shall publish annually, (in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW), a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance (as defined in
§
1042.02) with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (j)   Confidential information.
      (1)   Information and data furnished to the city with respect to the
nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the discharger specifically
requests that the release of the information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or
proprietary information of the discharger.
      (2)   When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of
a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, the State Disposal
System permit, the pretreatment programs, or all of these, provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement involving the discharger
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the city as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any party except as provided herein
and unless a ten-day notification is given to the discharger by certified mail.
(Ord. 32-84, passed 4-15-1985; Ord. 27-2017, passed 12-4-2017)
§ 1042.15  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS RE UNUSUAL WASTES.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.16  TAMPERING.
   No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage
system.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.17  IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   The Building Inspector, the Superintendent of the Sewage Plant and other
duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at all
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.18  OHIO SANITARY CODE ADOPTED.
   The current edition of the Ohio Sanitary Code, as amended to date, is hereby
made a part of this chapter and the provisions of the Code shall apply to the
construction, modification or abandonment of all sanitary sewage facilities
located within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 21-80, passed 10-6-1980)
§ 1042.19  SANITARY SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (a)   Sanitary sewer service may be furnished to lots or parcels of land
outside the city only upon written application of the developers or lot owners
outside the city approved for the purposes of city sanitary sewer collection by
the Director of Public Service and formally accepted by Council.
   (b)   The written application shall contain the following information and
statements:
      (1)   That the desired city utilities shall be constructed at no cost to
the city and that the same will be constructed in accordance with the plans,
details and specifications approved by the Director of Public Service subject
to inspection by the city;
      (2)   That there shall also be delivered to the Director of Finance and
Public Record an annexation petition for the property binding upon the owners
or developers of the property and their heirs and assigns, as persons acquiring
title to the real estate from the owners or developers, together with all
necessary petitions for improvements as provided for in the Subdivision
Regulations, which petition shall also be binding on the owners or developers
and their heirs and assigns acquiring title to the real estate from the owners
or developers;
      (3)   That the annexation petition shall be presented to the County
Commissioners and the annexation completed within six months, or the same,
together with all petitions for improvements not completed within that period,
shall be recorded in the Miscellaneous Docket, Richland County, Ohio, the same
to be added to and/or made a part of any and all future annexation proceedings
for any and all properties adjacent thereto and to remain in full force and
effect until the annexation is completed into the city; and
      (4)   That the improvement petitions for any and all improvements not
completed by the owner or developer shall also be in full force and effect and
binding upon the owners and developers and their heirs and assigns, as the
owners of the real estate, and at the discretion of Council may be acted upon
for a period of ten years after the annexation of the territory is completed.
(Ord. 3-99, passed 3-1-1999)
§ 1042.20  PHOTOGRAPHS REQUIRED.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service is hereby directed, prior to final
approval of any newly installed sewer system and/or reconstructed sewer, to
require that all contractors cause to be made one set of internal photographs
of all house lateral connections. In addition, photographs shall be taken at
20-foot intervals along the main line of the entire system installed, both
sanitary and storm, at the completion of the project, showing thereby that the
sewer system has been constructed according to sound engineering standards and
that the system is free of defects and accumulations of foreign substances and
that the passage and flow of sewage and storm water are free and clear. All
such photographic work shall be done in the presence of the City Engineer or
his or her authorized representative and the photographer shall also submit a
statement of his or her findings as to the condition of the sewers.
   (b)   Upon inspection of the photographs and review of the photographer's
statement and upon the City Engineer finding that the sewer is free and clear
of all foreign substances and is of sound workmanship, the Director of Public
Service is hereby authorized to approve the same as a final inspection, placing
in safekeeping all photographs for future reference.
   (c)   The cost of the photography and photographs shall be paid entirely by
the contractor or developer of the land and/or sewer system and the photographs
shall remain the property of the city.
(Ord. 32-75, passed 12-1-1975)
§ 1042.21  CROSS-CONNECTIONS BETWEEN WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (a)   No plumbing fixture, device or construction shall be installed that
will provide a cross-connection between a distribution system of water for
drinking purposes and drainage system, soil or waste pipe, so as to permit or
make possible the backflow of sewage into the water supply system either by
gravity or siphonage.
   (b)   All sewer mains and water mains, as well as sewer laterals and house
water connections, shall be installed not less than ten feet center-to-center
to prevent cross-over connections between the two.
(Ord. 28-75, passed 9-15-1975)
§ 1042.22  ABANDONMENT OF SEWER LATERALS.
    When any structure is demolished and the existing sanitary sewer lateral is
not used or reused, the lateral shall be dug up by the property owner or his or
her representative at the main sewer line or at the right-of-way line, plugged
with a flexible elastomeric cap with a stainless steel band or "FerncoQwik Cap"
(or approved equal), and abandoned. Inspection and approval of the abandonment
shall be completed by the city.
(Ord. 30-99, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 37-2013, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 1042.23  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMITTING PROGRAM.
   This chapter authorizes the creation of the "City of Shelby; Industrial
Pretreatment Program (IPP)" under separate cover. The detailed descriptions,
applications, permits and forms comprising this program are located within the
IPP and are maintained under the control of the Superintendent. The IPP will
contain these elements:
   (a)   Industrial user listing (as defined in §
1042.02).
      (1)   Industrial users.
      (2)   Categorical industrial users.
      (3)   Significant industrial users.
   (b)   Waste Survey and Wastewater Baseline Analyses Forms.
   (c)   Industrial Discharge Permit applications. No Significant Industrial
User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an
Industrial Discharge Permit (IDP). Other users may also be required to obtain
an IDP, at the discretion of the Superintendent. All industrial users will
follow the application procedures as described in §
1042.14.
      (1)   Any existing user required to obtain an IDP, who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who
wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall within 90 days, submit
a completed IDP Application and Waste Survey to the Superintendent.
      (2)   Obtaining an IDP does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
      (3)   The Superintendent will evaluate the IDP application and data
furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of
receipt of a complete permit application, the Superintendent will determine
whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The Superintendent
may deny any application for an IDP.
      (4)   Once the IDP permit has been issued, the Superintendent will
perform baseline monitoring of the user within 90 days of commencing discharge
to the POTW, as described in §
1042.14.
      (5)   A new permit application is required every five years in order to
renew the IDP.
   (d)   Signatory requirements and certifications. All applications and user
reports submitted to the city, must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user (as defined in §
1042.02), and contain the following certification statement:
      "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
   (e)   Industrial Discharge Permit contents. IDPs issued by the city shall
include such conditions that are deemed reasonably necessary by the
Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health
and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW. Each IDP shall contain:
      (1)   A specific permit issuance date, expiration date and effective
date. An IDP shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years from the effective date of the permit. An IDP may be issued for a period
of less than five years, at the discretion of the Superintendent.
      (2)   The following statement: "Compliance with this permit does not
relieve the permittee of its obligation to comply with any or all applicable
pretreatment regulations, standards, or requirements under local, state, and
federal law, including any such regulations, standards, requirements, or laws
that may become effective during the terms of this permit. There are applicable
civil and criminal penalties for violation of the Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule."
      (3)   Opportunity for appeal. If a user wishes to appeal or challenge any
conditions imposed in the IDP, a written request may be filed for modification
or rescission of this permit with the Superintendent within 30 days of the
effective date of the IDP.
      (4)   A description of the location of the user's discharge outfall(s)
and all applicable effluent limits, including any Best Management Practices
(BMPs) required.
      (5)   All monitoring, sampling and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or BMPs) to be
monitored, the sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and/or local law.
      (6)   All reporting requirements, including self-monitoring, BMP
compliance, and accidental discharges. The IDP shall specify the notification
and reporting procedures including addresses and telephone numbers as
applicable. All records of reports requirements, including BMPs shall be
retained for at least three years.
         A.   When compliance with a BMP or a pollution prevention alternative
is required, documentation shall be included with all periodic compliance
reports to determine the compliance status of the user.
      (7)   Any special conditions or special monitoring requirements that the
Superintendent deems necessary to ensure the user's compliance with this
chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; including:
         A.   User requirements to control slug discharges and/or development
of a Slug Discharge Control Plans as described in §
1042.14.
         B.   Compliance plan and schedule to meet one or more of the
wastewater discharge limitations within the user's IDP.
         C.   User requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices.
         D.   Industrial Discharge Permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A permit shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner,
new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the
approval of the Superintendent.
         E.   Reopener clause allowing the city to modify the user's IDP at any
time due to any of the following changes:
            1.   A change or modification to a limitation or requirement as
identified in a section of this chapter.
            2.   Incorporation of special conditions resulting from the
issuance of a special order.
            3.   Promulgation of new Federal Pretreatment Standards.
            4.   Any permit modification which results in new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (f)   Additional procedures for operation of the IPP:
      (1)   User inspections by the city.
      (2)   City sampling of users.
      (3)   User reporting requirements.
      (4)   User upset or bypass notification.
   (g)   Local limits which are established to protect the POTW against pass
through and interference and the technical justification analyses are detailed
in the IPP. The current local limits are also listed in §
1042.13 of this section.
      (1)   Users must comply with all prohibitions and local limits listed in
these ordinances.
      (2)   Users that are subject to any categorical pretreatment standard (40
CFR 405-471) must also meet all limits as established in the applicable
regulation, unless any local limit is more stringent that the categorical
limit, in which case the local limit takes precedence.
      (3)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may
request that the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The
determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the
discretion of the Superintendent. The Industrial User must also meet all the
conditions of 40 CFR Part 403.6(c)(5).
      (4)   The city may also convert mass limits of a categorical pretreatment
standard to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations
applicable to individual industrial users under the following conditions: When
converting such limits to concentration limits, the control authority must use
the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of the standard and
document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as detailed in 40
CFR Part 403.6(d).
   (h)   Enforcement Response Plan. The Enforcement Response Plan (ERP), is
located in the Shelby IPP. It is to be used as a guidance document for the
city, and implemented as necessary by the Superintendent, in enforcing the
Shelby IPP. The ERP contains procedures describing how the city will
investigate and respond to instances of user noncompliance. The ERP also
describes the types of escalating enforcement the city will take in response to
anticipated industrial user violations, and the time periods within which the
responses will take place. The ERP also includes judicial enforcement remedies
that can be implemented by the city if necessary. The city retains the right to
make case-by-case enforcement decisions and settlements which may or may not
follow the exact wording of the ERP.
(Ord. 27-2017, passed 12-4-2017)
§ 1042.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first
offense and shall be fined not more than $100.  For any subsequent offense the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.  In addition, the offender shall be liable for any damage,
destruction or cost incurred by the city because of the offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1042.16 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
CHAPTER 1044:  SEWER CHARGES
Section
   
1044.01   Definitions
   
1044.02   Conditions of service; rate schedule
   
1044.03   Unclassified businesses
   
1044.04   Payment of charges; remedy of city for nonpayment; surcharges
   
1044.05   Use of funds
   
1044.06   Change in classification
   
1044.07   Sanitary sewer capital improvements surcharge
   
1044.08   Deposits
 
   
1044.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Council to establish charges for sewer line connections, see §
220.06
   Dumping into sewers, ditches, watercourses and the like, see §
660.12
   Power to regulate, construct, see Charter §§
111 et seq.
   Private sewage disposal systems, see
Ch. 1046
   Sewer connections, see Charter §
93
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
Statutory reference:
   Interference with sewage flow, see R.C. § 4933.24
   Sewerage districts, see  R.C. §§ 727.44 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see R.C. § 729.49
   Weekly deposit to Sewer Fund, see R.C. § 729.52
§ 1044.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Commercial unit." Any structure or part thereof which is suitable for
separate tenancy as a commercial, retail or service establishment.
   (b)   "Dwelling unit." Any structure or part thereof which is suitable for
separate tenancy as living quarters.
   (c)   "Industrial unit." Any structure or part thereof which is suitable for
separate tenancy as an establishment involved in the manufacture of a product.
   (d)   "Sanitary sewerage." Waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, cellar floor drains, garage
floor drains, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking
fountains, ice machines and stable floor drains, industrial and commercial
wastes or discharge of every kind, and such other wastes and discharges as the
Director of Public Service may determine and define.
(Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990)
§ 1044.02  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE; RATE SCHEDULE.
   The terms and conditions upon which the owners of lots and lands within and
outside of the corporate limits of the city may connect to or receive the
benefits of the sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, and the charges
for the service, shall be as follows:
   (a)   Domestic.
      (1)   Per dwelling unit inside the city limits, per month:
 
                                        Base     PCA      PER      2/1/2012
Customer charge                                                    $6.84180
Usage charge (per 100 cu. ft. of water) $1.15218 $0.49326 $0.60191 $2.24735
 
      (2)   Per dwelling unit outside the city limits, per month:
 
                                        Base     PCA      PER      2/1/2012
Customer charge                                                    $13.68357
Usage charge (per 100 cu. ft. of water) $1.15218 $0.49326 $0.60191 $2.24735
 
      (3)   The rate for elderly or totally disabled customers who meet age,
income and other prerequisites as determined by the Director of Public Service
(such prerequisites being subject to approval of Council) shall have the
customer charge portion of their bill reduced by 10%.
 
                                        Base     PCA      PER      2/1/2012
Customer charge                                                    $6.16461
Usage charge (per 100 cu. ft. of water) $1.15218 $0.49326 $0.60191 $2.24735
 
   (b)   Commercial and/or industrial.
      (1)   Per commercial unit producing human waste only, per month:
 
                                        Base     PCA      PER      2/1/2012
Customer charge                                                    $13.68357
Usage charge (per 100 cu. ft. of water) $1.15218 $0.49326 $0.60191 $2.24735
 
      (2)   Per commercial unit producing other than human waste or per
industrial unit, per month:
 
                                        Base     PCA      PER      2/1/2012
Customer charge                                                    $41.03903
Usage charge (per 100 cu. ft. of water) $1.15218 $0.49326 $0.60191 $2.24735
 
   (c)   Separate contracts. The Director of Public Service shall have the
power and authority to enter into a separate contract with any governmental
unit and any sewer user not covered by the above- described classifications,
or, if covered by the above classifications, producing an unusual or
extraordinary amount or type of waste.
   (d)   Multiple classifications. In the event that one structure contains
more than one classification of customers, the Director of Public Service shall
determine the proper billing procedure so that each customer pays at least the
minimum charge for the appropriate classification.
   (e)   Rate adjustment provision. Beginning January 1, 2010, and on every
January 1 thereafter, the customer charge and the Base and Project and
Equipment Rider (PER) of the usage charge shall be adjusted upwards by a factor
equal to 100% of the most current Consumer Price Index (CPI) as determined by
the Government of the United States, if the number is positive (+). If the CPI
is negative (-), then the effective rates as stated above shall be adjusted
downward by a factor equal to 100% of the CPI. In no event shall the effective
rates as stated above be adjusted upward by more than 3% in any one year.
   (f)   Production cost adjuster. The Production Cost Adjuster shall be
derived every three months by dividing (1) the past 12 months cost of
electricity, water and sewer, and  natural gas utilized at the Waste Water
Treatment Plant, the cost of all chemicals used in the waste water treatment
process, the cost of lab testing and supplies required for the waste water
treatment process, and cost of the sludge removal process (hereinafter referred
to as “previous 12 months cost”) by (2) the sum of the past 12 months cubic
feet of water billed for the sewer charges (hereinafter referred to as
“previous 12 months cubic feet billed”).
 
Previous 12 months’ cost (numerator)

Previous 12 months’ cubic feet billed (denominator) Production Cost Adjuster
 
   (g)   Project and Equipment Rider. The Project and Equipment Rider portion
of the sewer charges shall be collected and utilized for capital projects and
equipment within the city’s sewer facility and shall include projects and/or
equipment necessary for the operation of the entire utility and its
infrastructure. The rates and charges set forth in the current city sewer rate
schedule may be increased for the purpose of providing funding for projects and
equipment purchases in furtherance of the city’s goal to provide the city’s
sewer utility consumers with the most economic, environmentally sound and
reliable operation of the sewer collection and treatment system.
(Ord. 14-97, passed 4-21-1997; Ord. 14-2004, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 11-2009,
passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 18-2012, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 1044.03  UNCLASSIFIED BUSINESSES.
   If any business is not covered by the classification provided in §
1044.02, the Director of Public Service shall classify the business, and within
30 days from the classification, the business affected may file a written
appeal to an appeals board consisting of the Director of Public Service, the
Director of Law and the Vice-President of Council.  The appeals board shall
review the facts and within 30 days either affirm or reclassify the
classification or rate and the decision of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990)
§ 1044.04  PAYMENT OF CHARGES; REMEDY OF CITY FOR NONPAYMENT; SURCHARGES.
   (a)   The charges levied pursuant to §
1044.02 shall be payable monthly at the end of the period of service rendered,
at the office of the Director of Public Service.
   (b)   All bills not paid 15 days after the due date shall be subject to a
10% surcharge.
(Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990; Ord. 48-2002, passed
11-4-2002)
§ 1044.05  USE OF FUNDS.
   Funds received from the users of the city sewerage system shall be used for
the payment of the costs and expenses of management, maintenance and repair of
the sewage treatment works and for the repair and maintenance of the sewerage
collector system.  Any surplus funds shall be put into the Maintenance and
Capital Improvement Account.
(Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990)
§ 1044.06  CHANGE IN CLASSIFICATION.
   If an owner of lots and lands changes the use of his or her property to the
degree that a change in classification as outlined in §
1044.02 is appropriate, it shall be his or her duty to notify the Director of
Public Service of the change.  The city shall reserve the right to make
adjustments to the sewer charges retroactive to the date of change in usage.
(Ord. 3-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990)
§ 1044.07  SANITARY SEWER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS SURCHARGE.
   (a)   "Residential" customers who are billed in accordance with the terms of
this chapter shall pay a surcharge of $9.29 per month.  This charge shall be
shown on the billing statement sand shall be designated for the Sanitary Sewer
Capital Improvement Fund.
   (b)   "Senior citizen residential" customers who are billed in accordance
with the terms of this chapter shall pay a surcharge of $3.50 per month.  This
charge shall be shown on the billing statement and shall be designated for the
Sanitary Sewer Capital Improvement Fund.
   (c)   "Commercial" customers who are billed in accordance with the terms of
this chapter shall pay a surcharge of $12.29 per month.  This charge shall be
shown on the billing statement and shall be designated for the Sanitary Sewer
Capital Improvement Fund.
   (d)   “Industrial customers” who are billed in accordance with the terms of
this chapter shall pay a surcharge of $14.29 per month.  This charge shall be
shown on the billing statement and shall be designated for the Sanitary Sewer
Capital Improvement Fund.
   (e)   Any individual or business entity that is using the Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System of the City of Shelby, Ohio, shall be billed for the Sanitary
Sewer Capital Improvement Fund surcharge in accordance with the terms of
divisions (a) through (d) of this section.  In the case of individuals or
business entities whose sanitary sewer usage or consumption is not separately
metered and who, therefore, receive no sanitary sewer billings, the appropriate
charge for the Sanitary Sewer Capital Improvement Fund shall be added to their
utility bill, unless their water service has been shut off by the city, and
where there is only one water meter in a structure with multiple living units,
the main water meter will have to be shut off to receive no bill for the
separate living units.
   (f)   Monies shall be collected for a maximum of 20 years (January 1, 2015
to December 31, 2034) and will be reviewed annually by Shelby City Council to
determine the continued need for collection.  The new rates will begin with the
July 2017 bills and will be shown on the August 2017 billings.
(Ord. 28-2003, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 32-2010, passed 1-3-2011; Ord. 11-2014,
passed 6-2-2014; Ord. 17-2014, passed 10-6-2014; Ord. 11-2017, passed 6-19-
2017)
§ 1044.08  DEPOSITS.
   (a)   A deposit of $100.00 shall be for the following utility service when
combined with electric and/or water:
      1.   Sewer.
   (b)   A deposit of $150.00 shall be for the following utility service:
      1.   Sewer only.
   (c)   A deposit not exceeding $300.00 for a combined utility service of
electric, water, and sewer for residential customers or 150% of an estimated
average bill for commercial and industrial customers (unless the service is
temporary), may be required of the customer at any time, or from time to time
before or after service is commenced. Deposit criteria will be affected by but
not limited to:
      1.   Past general credit history;
      2.   Past payment history (with the utility);
      3.   End use of service; and
      4.   Duration of service.
   (d)   The utility office shall have a reasonable time in which to ascertain
that the obligations of the customer have been fully performed before being
required to return any deposit. The deposit shall be credited to the customer’s
account when payments have been made by the due date on 12 consecutive months,
unless the customer’s account has been terminated. Where the account has been
terminated, any remaining deposit not used to credit the account shall be
directly reimbursed to the customer within 30 calendar days.
   (e)   There shall be no interest paid or accrued on deposits.
(Ord. 29-2016, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 1044.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 4-90, passed 4-2-1990)
CHAPTER 1046:  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
   
1046.01   Adoption of Health Division regulations
   
1046.02   Amendments
Cross-reference:
   Approval required prior to issuance of building permits or zoning
certificates, see §
1262.07
   Septic tank systems, see §
1296.10
   Septic tanks in subdivisions, see §
1246.04
   Septic tanks within the city water supply watershed area, see §
1040.11
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1040
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate water closets and privies, see R.C. § 715.40
§ 1046.01  ADOPTION OF HEALTH DIVISION REGULATIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby approved and adopted the Sanitary Code of the Shelby
City Division of Health, being regulations governing household sewage disposal
systems as adopted by the Board on June 27, 1974.
   (b)   All fees provided in the Sanitary Code are hereby authorized to be
collected by the Health Commissioner and/or his or her designated agent and
shall be deposited by the Health Commissioner with the Director of Finance and
Public Record, who shall put the same into the General Fund.
   (c)   The Sanitary Code is hereby incorporated into this section by
reference and a copy of the same is attached to original Ordinance 28-74 and
made a part hereof as though fully rewritten herein. File and distribution
copies shall be as provided in R.C. § 731.231.
(Ord. 28-74, passed 8-19-1974)
§ 1046.02  AMENDMENTS.
   Section 2.0, Sewage Disposal Requirements, of the Sanitary Code adopted in §
1046.01, is hereby modified to include the following additional sections:
   2.7   The Health Commissioner shall by certified mail notify any property
owner who has refused to discontinue his or her present sewage disposal system
and connect to an accessible sanitary sewer system.
   2.8   If the property owner does not abandon his or her existing system and
begin using the available sanitary sewage system after receipt of the notice,
the Mayor as Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to enter subject
property and make all improvements necessary to install, maintain and operate a
sanitary sewage system.
   2.9   The Mayor as Director of Public Service is hereby further authorized
to remove any buildings used in connection with the outdoor disposal system, to
properly fill the drainage area and to certify these costs to the County
Auditor for placement on the property owner's taxes if he or she refuses to pay
this charge within 30 days upon completion of the necessary work.
(Ord. 19-80, passed 9-15-1980)
CHAPTER 1050:  ELECTRICITY
Editor's note:
   
Chapter 1050 was amended in its entirety by Ordinance 33-2001, passed August
20, 2001.
Section
   
1050.01   Definitions
   
1050.02   Rates and charges for service
   
1050.03   Service and physical property
   
1050.04   Metering and billing
   
1050.05   General provisions
   
1050.06   Photovoltaic and wind generation interconnection general requirements
   
1050.07   Net metering schedule
 
   
1050.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Division of Electricity and Communications, see
Ch. 248
   Electric fences, see §
1462.08
   Power to regulate, construct, see Charter §§
111 et seq.
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   National Electrical Code, see
Ch. 1424
   Transfer of funds to Electric Enterprise Fund, see §
234.08
Statutory reference:
   Contracts with municipal corporation for light, see R.C. § 4933.04
   Electric companies may manufacture and supply both electricity and gas, see
R.C. § 4933.02
   Legislative authority may erect or purchase electric works, see R.C. §
743.34
   Utilities generally, see R.C. Ch. 743
§ 1050.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "City." The City of Shelby, Ohio.
   (b)   "Council." The Council of the City of Shelby.
   (c)   "Customer." An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity receiving one class of service through one meter at one structure at one
location, subject to these rules and regulations.
   (d)   "Landlord/customer." The owner of the structure and/or location where
a customer is taking service, if the owner is different from the end user of
service and the owner is responsible for payment of the electric bill for the
structure and/or location.
   (e)   "Month." The elapsed time between two successive meter readings,
approximately 30 days apart.
   (f)   "Utility." The Division of Electricity and Telecommunications of the
city.
(Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001)
§ 1050.02  RATES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   Service schedules.
      (1)   Schedule A.
         A.   Availability of service.  Available for single phase electric
service at 225 amps capacity (120-240 volts), maximum, through one meter to
individual customers.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. Customer charge             $4.33
2. Distribution charge all kWh $0.0172
 
         C.   Riders. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the
applicable generation charge, fuel and purchased power and transmission cost
rider as specified in this tariff.
         D.   Minimum charge. The minimum charge shall be the customer charge.
         E.   Terms of payment. The net amount billed is due on the fifteenth
day of the month.
      (2)   Schedule A-D.
         A.   Availability of service. Available for single phase electric
service at 225 amps capacity (120-240 volts), maximum, through one meter to
individual customers. In addition, customers under Schedule A-D must meet age,
income and other prerequisites as determined by the Director of Public Service,
subject to the approval of the City Council. Rates under this schedule for
distribution charge and all riders, excluding customer charge and kWh taxes
shall be reduced by 10% to eligible customers.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. Customer charge             $2.94
2. Distribution charge all kWh $0.0155
 
         C.   Riders. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the
applicable generation charge, fuel and purchased power and transmission cost
rider as specified in this tariff. The charges shall be discounted by 10%.
         D.   Minimum charge. The minimum charge shall be the customer charge.
         E.   Terms of payment. The net amount billed is due on the fifteenth
day of the month.
      (3)   Schedule B.
         A.   Availability of service. Available for single phase electric
service over 225 amps capacity (120-240 volts), minimum, or three phase
electric service at 200 kW capacity, maximum, through one meter to individual
customers.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. Customer charge (single phase) $5.57
2. Customer charge (three phase)  $7.73
3. Customer charge (primary)      $12.99
4. Distribution charge all kWh    $0.0106
5. Demand charge all kWh          $4.64
 
         C.   Riders. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the
applicable generation charge, fuel and purchased power and transmission cost
rider as specified in this tariff.
         D.   Minimum charge. The minimum charge shall be the customer charge
plus minimum demand charge.
         E.   Demand. The billing load for the month shall be the highest 15-
minute integrated demand as determined by the instruments suitable for the
purpose. Where energy is delivered through two meters, the monthly billing
demand will be taken as the sum of the two demands separately determined. For
purposes of billing, no demand shall be less than 15 kW.
         F.   Terms of payment. The net amount billed is due on the fifteenth
day of the month.
         G.   Credit for maintenance of primary service. When the customer
furnishes and maintains the complete substation equipment, including any and
all transformers and/or switches and/or other apparatus necessary for the
customer to take service at the voltage of the primary transmission or
distribution line from which the customer is to receive service, a credit shall
be applied as follows:
   All delivery voltages: $0.15/kVa
         H.   Power factor. The average power factor shall be determined for
each month by comparing the kilowatt hours of power consumed during the month
with the reactive power consumed during the month. When the average power
factor, as determined by continuous measurement of lagging kVa is less than
90%, the billing demand (kVa) shall be determined by multiplying the maximum
demand (kW) shown by the demand meter for the billing period, by the multiplier
as indicated in the calculation below:
         1 + (.9 - pf)
         where:
         pf = customer's power factor
      (4)   Schedule C.
         A.   Availability of service. Available for three-phase electric
service over 200 kW capacity through one meter to individual customers. Rates,
terms and conditions for service to customers with requirements other than
previously stipulated shall be offered only by special contract.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. Customer charge (Three Phase) $10.52
2. Customer charge (primary)     $20.08
3. Distribution charge all kWh   $0.0072
4. Demand charge all kWh         $2.47
 
         C.   Riders. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the
applicable generation charge, fuel and purchased power and transition cost
rider as specified in this tariff.
         D.   Minimum charge. The minimum charge shall be the customer charge
plus minimum demand charge.
         E.   Demand. The billing load for the month shall be the highest 15-
minute integrated demand as determined by the instruments suitable for the
purpose. Where energy is delivered through two meters, the monthly billing
demand will be taken as the sum of the two demands separately determined. For
purposes of billing, no demand shall be less than 81kW.
         F.   Terms of payment. The net amount billed is due on the fifteenth
day of the month.
         G.   Credit for maintenance of primary service. When the customer
furnishes and maintains the complete substation equipment, including any and
all transformers and/or switches and/or other apparatus necessary for the
customer to take service at the voltage of the primary transmission or
distribution line from which the customer is to receive service, a credit shall
be applied as follows:
      All delivery voltages: $0.15/kVa
         H.   Power factor. The average power factor shall be determined for
each month by comparing the kilowatt hours of power consumed during the month
with the reactive power consumed during the month. When the average power
factor, as determined by continuous measurement of lagging kVars, is less than
90%, the billing demand (kVa) shall be determined by multiplying the maximum
demand (kW), shown by the demand meter for the billing period, by the
multiplier as indicated in the calculation below:
         1 + (.9 - pf)
         where:
         pf = customers' power factor
      (5)   Schedule D.
         A.   Availability of service. Available for electrical energy used for
city-owned and operated facilities.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. Customer charge             $9.28
2. Distribution charge all kWh $0.0106
 
         C.   Riders. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the
applicable generation charge, fuel and purchased power, and transmission cost
rider as specified in this tariff.
         D.   Unbilled service. Service shall be provided without charge to the
following facilities: Shelby City Hall, Shelby Municipal Court, Police
Department, Sutter-Roush Rooms, Municipal Utilities Office, Fire Department,
Marvin Memorial Library, Parks Department, Electric Distribution Department,
Municipal Light Plant, Municipal Garage, Skiles Field, Girl Scouts' House, Log
Cabin and Siegfried Field. Services shall be provided without charge for public
street lighting and traffic-control devices.
      (6)   Security light service.
         A.   Availability of service.
            1.   Available to customers where utility's standard outdoor
lighting unit can be installed on utility's existing pole and does not require
any extension or addition to utility's existing secondary or primary
distribution facilities, including transformer. Any relocation of a lighting
unit shall be at customer's expense.
            2.   Where additional facilities are required, the customer shall
pay, in advance, the total installation cost for the additional distribution
facilities (poles, wires, transformer and appurtenances) as are required. In
all cases, the lighting fixture itself, including lamp, will be installed,
owned, operated and maintained by utility.
            3.   This service is available only where there is reasonable
assurance that the service to be furnished will be permanent. Utility reserves
the right to refuse to furnish such service when, in utility's opinion, the
installation will not be of permanent character.
            4.   All applications for outdoor security lighting service shall
be on a 12-month year-round service basis. Where the premises are occupied by a
tenant, utility reserves the right to require the application for service to be
made by the property owner with bills to be sent to the premises to the
attention of the tenant. However, the property owner shall be responsible for
the payment of the bills.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
1. 40 watt LED                   $5.50
2. 100 watt high pressure sodium $5.50
3. 175 watt mercury vapor        $7.50
4. 400 watt metal halide         $17.50
5. 1,000 watt metal halide       $43.00
 
         C.   Additional facilities. Where a pole is installed in order to
provide service under this schedule, the customer shall be charged $1.00 per
month in addition to the rate for service.
      (7)   Electric vehicle charging station service rider.
         A.   The charge for service shall cover the fuel and purchase power
costs, distribution charge, generation charge, and demand charge under the
Schedule B rates and charges for service. The total charge for service shall be
competitive with comparable gasoline prices per gallon. The cost for service
shall be served at a kWh cost. The assigned competitive equivalent equation can
be used as a barometer to calculate a comparable kWh cost for service; (cost
per gallon of gasoline x 3 miles per kWh divided by 24.1 miles per gallon).
      The Director of Public Service or his/her designee shall review the cost
of service every three months for comparable charges and adjust the said
service rider accordingly for competitive service charges.
   (b)   Generation charges, fuel and purchased power, and transition cost
rider. The transition cost rider, generation charge and fuel and purchased
power charge shall be applied to the A, A-D, B, C and D Schedules. The rate
design of the generation charge and fuel and purchased power charge may be
changed from time to time as approved by Council.
      (1)   Generation charge. The generation charge shall be $0.0055 kWh.
      (2)   Determination of fuel and purchased power charge. The fuel and
purchased power charge shall be derived every three months by dividing (1) the
past 12 months' cost of fuel and purchased power, including the cost associated
with transmission-related services (hereinafter referred to as "previous 12
months' cost", by (2) the sum of the past 12 months' net kilowatt hours
generated and purchased multiplied by 0.94 (hereinafter referred to as
"previous 12 months' net kWh").
 
Previous 12 months' cost (numerator)             0 Fuel/Purchased
Previous 12 months' net kWh x 0.94 (denominator)   Power Charge
 
      (3)   Determination of transition cost rider.
         A.   The transition cost rider shall be calculated and implemented
upon the offering of open access service.
         B.   Transition costs shall be calculated yearly. Transition costs are
generally defined as the difference between purchased power costs of those
sources where construction costs, market price at the time of contractual
obligation, and/or other factors may cause the fixed and/or average cost of
that power to be significantly higher than average market prices. The
transition cost rider may be adjusted each year based on projected market
price, average cost of power from transition cost sources, fixed costs of
contracted power supply, implementation costs of the offering of open access
service, and sales of the previous year. A reconciliation of over or under
recovery of transition costs is taken forward to the next year as a debit or
credit to transition costs. Projected transition cost recovery is allocated
between demand and energy costs and credited to total demand and energy costs
of generation. This credit ensures that there will be no double recovery of
transition costs.
      (4)   Project development and construction rider. The rates and charges
set forth in the current city electric rate schedule may be increased for the
purpose of providing funding for the city's share of the developmental and/or
construction costs associated with projects undertaken by the city
independently or in conjunction with a third party in furtherance of the city's
goal to provide the city's electric utility consumers with the most economic,
environmentally sound and reliable source(s) of power.
   (c)   Economic development incentive rate.
      (1)   Applicable to commercial and industrial customers.
         A.   To qualify, a new or existing customer shall meet the following
criteria:
            1.   New commercial customers shall have a monthly demand of at
least 20 kW. Existing commercial customers shall add a monthly demand of at
least 20 kW.
            2.   New industrial customers shall have a monthly demand of at
least 200kW. Existing industrial customers shall add a monthly demand of at
least 200 kW.
            3.   New commercial customers shall employ at least two full time
equivalent employees*. Existing commercial customers shall employ at least two
additional full time equivalent employees*.
            4.   New industrial customers shall employ at least five full time
equivalent employees*. Existing industrial customers shall add at least five
additional full time equivalent employees*.
*A full-time equivalent employee is defined as a person who works at least 35
hours per week.
            5.   New or existing customers shall pay a minimum $2,000 annual
income tax contribution to the City of Shelby.
            6.   This section shall have a retroactive period from January 1,
2017.
      (2)   The economic development incentive rate shall not exceed five years
in duration. A year is defined as: 12 consecutive months from when the
incentive rate was implemented to the utility account.
      (3)   The five year economic development incentive rate shall be as
follows:
         Year 1 - wholesale quarterly fuel & purchase power cost, minimum
demand charge, generation charge, distribution charge, customer charge, and kWh
tax. A discount of $0.01 per kWh cost will be applied to the rate schedule.
         Year 2 - wholesale quarterly fuel & purchase power cost, minimum
demand charge, generation charge, distribution charge, customer charge, and kWh
tax. A discount of $0.0075 per kWh cost will be applied to the rate schedule.
         Year 3 - wholesale quarterly fuel & purchase power cost, minimum
demand charge, generation charge, distribution charge, customer charge, and kWh
tax. A discount of $0.005 per kWh cost will be applied to the rate schedule.
         Year 4 - wholesale quarterly fuel & purchase power cost, minimum
demand charge, generation charge, distribution charge, customer charge, and kWh
tax. A discount of $0.0025 per kWh cost will be applied to the rate schedule.
         Year 5 - wholesale quarterly fuel & purchase power cost, minimum
demand charge, generation charge, distribution charge, customer charge, and kWh
tax.
         Year 6 and forward - current retail rate.
      (4)   The Director of Public Service or his/her designee shall have the
right to terminate a customer's economic development incentive rate at any
time.
      (5)   The Director of Public Service or his/her designee shall review
each economic development incentive rate customer annually. Each customer shall
cooperate fully in said review.
      (6)   The Director of Public Service or his/her designee shall determine
if a new or existing customer will qualify for the economic development
incentive rate if the account does not meet all of the criteria, subject to
council approval.
   (d)   Balance levelization rate rider.
      (1)   Service schedules A, A-D, B, C, and D shall have a negative rate
rider in the amount of $0.00163/kWh. The negative rate rider shall be
implemented for a period of five years. The rider shall be itemized on the
utility bill as a credit and identified as balance levelization.
   (e)   Miscellaneous charges (applicable to all customers).
      (1)   Reconnection charge. When a customer has previously requested a
disconnect and desires to be reconnected at the same address, or if a
reconnection is made subsequent to a service disconnection made in violation of
provisions of these rules and regulations, a reconnection charge of $30.00 will
be made if the reconnection is made during regular business hours. If the
reconnection is requested and made after regular business hours, the charge is
$80.00.
      (2)   Late payment charge. If a bill payment is not received by the
utility offices or by the utility's authorized agent on or before the specified
payment date (the fifteenth of the month), a one-time, additional amount of 5%
of the amount of the bill will become due and payable as part of the customer's
total obligation. If the fifteenth of the month falls on a Sunday or holiday
where there is no postal service, the specified payment shall be the next
business day from the fifteenth.
      (3)   Dishonored check charge. Whenever a customer pays a bill by check
and the check is returned to the utility by the customer's financial
institution for lack of sufficient funds in the customer's account, the
customer will be assessed a dishonored check charge of $25.00 for each check
returned.
      (4)   Meter test charge. The utility shall test the meter at the request
of the customer. The test shall be performed in the presence of the customer if
he or she so requests. If the meter is found to be correct, the customer shall
pay a fee of $10.00 for the testing.
      (5)   Service fee. All service rendered to customer's equipment will be
billed to the customer for labor and material required on the basis of cost
plus 10% at the time of service.
      (6)   Application fee. An application fee of $5.00 shall be assessed to
customers at the time of application for service.
   (f)   Kilowatt-hour tax adjustment. The rates and charges set forth in the
current city electric rate schedules shall be increased by an amount equal to
the kilowatt-hour tax imposed on the city's electric distribution system under
R.C. § 5727.81. The increase shall become effective with the bills that include
May 1, 2001, as part of the usage period and shall thereafter be automatically
adjusted to reflect any change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. §
5727.81 increase in the current schedule that reflects the following:
      (1)   For the first 2,000 kWh delivered, the tax rate shall be $0.00465
per kWh delivered.
      (2)   For the next 2,001 to 15,000 kWh delivered, the tax rate shall be
$0.00419 per kWh.
      (3)   For any kWh above 15,000, the tax rate shall be $0.00363.
(Ord. 16-2001, passed 5-8-2001; Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001;  Ord. 49-2003,
passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 28-2004, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 18-2005, passed 6-6-
2005; Ord. 12-2006, passed 6-5-2006; Ord. 14-2008, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 31-
2008, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 9-2013, passed 11-18-2013; Ord. 50-2013, passed
12-16-2013; Ord. 7-2015, passed 3-16-2015; Ord. 31-2015, passed 9-8-2015; Ord.
9-2017, passed 5-15-2017; Ord. 10-2018, passed 6-18-2018; Ord. 12-2019, passed
6-17-2019)
§ 1050.03  SERVICE AND PHYSICAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Service boundary.  Exclusively, the utility shall supply all electric
service within the corporate limits of the city.  Subject to Article XVIII of
the Ohio Constitution, the utility may extend service to customers outside the
corporate limits of the city.
   (b)   Application for service.
      (1)   A copy of the schedules and standard terms and conditions under
which service is rendered to customers will be furnished upon request at the
utility office.  The utility shall determine which schedule is applicable to
serve customers.  Once an application for service is approved, service will be
commenced and a copy of the service agreement will be furnished to the customer
upon request.  If a customer desires delivery of energy at more than one point,
a separate agreement shall be required for each separate point of delivery. 
Service delivered at each point of delivery shall be billed separately under
the applicable schedule.
      (2)   The customer (or landlord/customer), after making proper
application for service, shall notify the utility when the customer desires
service to be established.  In no case shall the customer, landlord/customer,
customer's agent or customer's employee turn on service.  Service shall be
turned on, upon the date specified, by an authorized agent of the utility.  If
the utility finds itself unable to establish service on the date specified, it
shall notify the customer as soon in advance as possible and a new date shall
be established by mutual agreement.
      (3)   When landlord/customers make application for service, the tenant(s)
name(s) shall be included on the application.
   (c)   Service not transferrable.  No person may commence use of service
until after making application therefor and requesting the utility to turn on
the service in accordance with division (b)(2) of this section.  In the event
of violation of this provision, in addition to other rights of the utility,
that person shall be liable for all electricity consumed in the premises.  Any
successor in interest to a customer, including without limitation heirs,
executors, administrators, assignees, trustees, guardians, receivers and
conservators, shall be deemed to be a person who must make application for
service; provided that any successor in interest whose rights arise from death
or incompetence of the customer shall have 30 days in which to make
application.
   (d)   Customer indebted to utility.  Service will not be supplied to any
premises, if at the time of application for service, the applicant is indebted
to the utility for service previously supplied at the same time or other
premises, until payment of the indebtedness or other arrangement satisfactory
to the utility shall have been made.  Unpaid balances of previously rendered
final bills shall be transferred and included on the initial or subsequent bill
for a like service account.  Such transferred final bills, if unpaid, will be
part of the past due balance of the transferred account and subject to the
utility's collections and disconnection procedures.  The transfer of final
bills is limited to like service, i.e., residential to residential, commercial
to commercial.  The utility may not transfer a delinquent customer service
account to any account where any end user is a residential service customer.
   (e)   Service connections.
      (1)   The customer assumes all responsibility for property owned by the
customer on customer's side of the point of delivery, generally at the
weatherhead, for the service supplied or taken, as well as for the installation
of appliances used in connection therewith, and will save the utility harmless
from and against all claims for injury or damage to persons or property
occasioned by or in any way resulting from the service or the use thereof on
the customer's side of the point of delivery.
      (2)   When service is from an overhead system, the customer's wiring must
extend at least 15 inches beyond the building.  Where a customer installs
service entrance facilities which have capacity and layout specified by the
utility, and/or installs and uses certain utilization equipment specified by
the utility, the utility may provide or offer to own facilities on the
customer's side of the point where service wires attach to the building.  All
inside wiring must be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the
National Electrical Code, or the requirements of any local inspection service
authorized by the city.  When a customer desires that energy be delivered at a
point or in a manner other than that designated by the utility, the customer
shall pay the additional cost of same.  Where service is supplied from an
underground distribution system which has been installed at the utility's
expense within the limits of a city street, the customer shall make
arrangements with the utility for the utility to supply and install a
continuous run of cable conductors, including necessary ducts from the manhole
or connection box to the meter base.  The customer shall pay the cost of
installing the portion of cable and duct from the property lines to the
terminus or cable outside the building.  When a real estate developer desires
an underground distribution system within the property which he or she is
developing or when a customer desires an underground service, the real estate
developer or the customer may bear the costs for the underground facilities.
   (f)   Continuity of service.
      (1)   The utility shall furnish necessary and adequate service and
facilities.  The utility shall not be liable in damages for failure to supply
electricity or for interruptions in service, and shall be relieved of its
obligation to serve and may discontinue or modify service, if the failure or
interruption is due to natural disasters or the public enemy, military actions,
wars, insurrections, riots, civil disturbances, vandalism, strikes, fires,
floods, washouts, explosions, acts or orders of any civil, judicial or military
authorities, and without limitation by the foregoing accidents, contingencies
or other causes beyond the control of the utility.
      (2)   Without incurring any liability therefor, the utility may also
suspend service for such periods as may be reasonably necessary in order to
make repairs to or changes in its facilities or other property; provided that
the utility shall keep a record of any interruption of service affecting its
entire system, or a major division thereof, including a statement of time,
duration and cause of interruption.  It will also notify customers affected by
the interruption in advance of the contemplated work, and approximately how
long the interruption will last.
      (3)   The utility shall not discontinue service to any customer without
giving the customer reasonable notice.  The notice shall be delivered either
personally or telephonically when possible and practical.  In circumstances,
however caused, when time does not permit the giving of the notice in advance
of a discontinuance of service or a change in service caused by circumstances
beyond the control of the utility, reasonable notice shall be given whenever
possible and practical to all customers affected advising them that service is
off and of the time at which service is expected to be restored.
   (g)   Customer's liability.  In the event of loss or injury to the property
of the utility through misuse by, or the negligence of, the customer or agents
of the same, the cost of the necessary repairs or replacement thereof shall be
paid to the utility by the customer.  No one except the agents of the utility
shall be allowed to make any internal or external adjustments of any meter or
other piece of apparatus which shall be the property of the utility.  The
utility shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter the premises of
the customer for the purpose of installing, reading, removing, testing,
replacing or otherwise disposing of its apparatus and property, and the right
of entire removal of the utility's property in the event of the termination of
service for any cause.
   (h)   Service not to be disturbed.  No customer shall attach or use any
appliances which may result in the altering of service provided through the
utility's lines.  Without prior approval from the utility, no customer shall
attach or use any appliances or devices which will increase, decrease or
otherwise alter service provided through the utility lines to such extent as to
interfere at any time with continuous service to other customers.
   (i)   No customer shall sell to another. Service furnished by the utility is
for the sole use of the customer and shall not be resold by the customer except
on written permission obtained from the utility.  The renting of premises with
the cost of service included in the rental as an incidence will not be
considered a resale of the services.
   (j)   Access to premises.  Neither the utility nor its agents or employees
shall enter into the interior of any structure on the premises of a customer
without the express permission of the customer except in cases of emergency. 
Any agent or employee seeking entrance into or upon the premises of a customer
shall have and show symbols of identification.  Any agent or employee seeking
entrance to the interior of any structure on the premises shall advise the
owner or occupant as to his or her purpose in doing so.  Except in cases of
emergency, no customer shall be obligated to afford entrance or access to his
or her premises except during normal business hours and then only to those
parts of the premises as may be the location of utility-owned property.
   (k)   Right-of-way.  The customer, without reimbursement, will make or
procure conveyance to the utility of right-of-way or right of entry and
installed lines satisfactory to the utility to permit the utility to cross
property between the utility's lines and the customer's property at the
location where service is to be furnished, including property owned or
controlled by the customer for the utility's distribution lines, extensions
thereof or appurtenances necessary or incidental to the supplying of service to
the customer.
   (l)   Meter furnished.  The utility will furnish, at no charge, each
customer with a meter of a size and type as the utility may determine will
adequately serve the customer's requirements.  The meter shall be and remain
the property of the utility, and the utility shall have the right to replace
it, as the utility may deem necessary.  The utility will furnish the meter
based upon presentation of appropriate permits.  In certain situations, the
utility shall install a service entrance, the cost of which shall be paid by
the customer.
   (m)   Meter location.
      (1)   The utility shall determine the location of the meter.  When
changes in buildings or arrangements therein render the meter inaccessible or
exposed to hazards, the utility may require the customer, at the customer's
expense, to relocate the meter setting together with any portion of the
customer's service line necessary to accomplish the relocation.
      (2)   In order to maintain access to the meter location, the customer
shall keep the area adjacent to the meter free of vegetation and debris. 
Failure to do so shall result in the utility clearing the area and assessing a
fee for the service.
   (n)   Only utility can connect meter.
      (1)   As used in this division, "tamper" means to interfere with, damage,
or by-pass a utility meter, conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the
correct registration of a meter or the proper function of a conduit or
attachment so as to reduce the amount of utility service that is registered on
the meter.
      (2)   No customer shall tamper with a meter, conduit or attachment of the
utility that has been disconnected by the utility.  The owner or customer shall
not permit anyone who is not an authorized agent of the utility to connect or
disconnect the utility's meters, or in any way alter or interfere with the
utility's meters.  Proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of the utility has
been tampered with is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to
pay for the service rendered through the meter, conduit, or attachment and is
in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the
tampering occurred has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft
offense.
      (3)   Tampering with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense
that could result in the imposition of criminal sanctions.
   (o)   Meter test.
      (1)   All meters shall be tested at such intervals and using such methods
as may be prescribed by generally accepted standards.  The meter shall be
removed from the customer's premises for the test and a substitute meter, newly
tested, shall be installed in its place.  After the meter has been tested and
before it is returned to service at the same or a different location, it shall
be adjusted to be accurate within 3%, plus or minus.
      (2)   The utility shall also test the meter at any time, at the request
of the customer.  The test shall be performed in the presence of the customer
if he or she so requests.  If the meter is found to be correct, as defined in
division (p) of this section, the customer shall pay a testing fee as listed in
§
1050.02(c)(4).
      (3)   The date of inspection shall be stamped on the meter.
   (p)   Correct meter.  A meter registering between 3% fast and 3% slow shall
be deemed, for all purposes, to be registering correctly.  A meter registering
incorrectly shall be replaced by the utility at its expense.
   (q)   Indoor wiring.  The customer shall install and maintain, at the
customer's expense, indoor wiring from the outlet of the meter electrical
appliances.  The utility shall have no obligation to install, maintain or
repair the wiring.
   (r)   Appliances.  The customer shall install and maintain all electrical
appliances.  The utility shall have no obligation to install, maintain or
repair appliances.
   (s)   Inspection of altered wiring.  It shall be the duty of the customer to
notify the utility promptly of any additions, changes, alterations, remodeling
or reconstruction affecting service on the customer's premises.
   (t)   Extension of distribution lines.
      (1)   The utility will extend its distribution lines on any dedicated
street or highway without cost, up to but not more than, a distance of 200 feet
for each applicant.  Upon application for a service extension of line in excess
of 200 feet for each applicant, the utility may enter into a line extension
agreement providing for a deposit with the utility of a sum deemed adequate by
the utility to cover the cost to be incurred by it for that portion of the
extension in excess of the footage which the utility will construct without
cost to the applicant.  The amount of deposit shall be determined by
multiplying the excess footage as herein above determined by the average cost
per foot to the utility of a similar size distribution line installed during
the preceding calendar year.
      (2)   All extensions shall be the property of the utility.
      (3)   Where a line of extension is necessary to provide service
availability to real estate plots or real estate subdivisions and the line
extension is deemed justified at the utility's expense, the owners or promoters
of the plots of lots or real estate subdivisions may enter into a line
extension agreement and deposit with the utility the estimated cost of that
portion of the main extension which is not deemed justified at the utility's
expense.
      (4)   Where a line extension is requested for commercial purposes and all
or part of the line extension is not deemed economically justified at the
utility's expense, the utility shall require the applicant or applicants to
enter into a line extension agreement and deposit with the utility the
estimated cost of that portion of the line extension which is not deemed
economically justified at the utility's expense.
(Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001)
§ 1050.04  METERING AND BILLING.
   (a)   Quantity of service delivered by meter.  A meter installed by the
utility, which shall be and remain the property of the utility, will measure
electricity.  Subject to certain exceptions enumerated below, consumption shall
be determined on the basis of the meter registration and bills shall reflect
the consumption so registered.
   (b)   Billing periods.  Bills will be rendered by the utility to the
customer on a monthly basis.  Non-receipt of bills by customer does not release
or diminish the obligation of customer with respect to payment thereof.  Meters
are ordinarily read at monthly intervals, but may be read more or less
frequently at the utility's option.
   (c)   Estimated bill.  When the meter is not read, the utility may estimate
the quantity of electricity consumed and render a bill for that quantity.
   (d)   Incorrect meter readings; billings.
      (1)   During any period that an incorrect meter reading is established,
the meter reading and bills based thereon shall be adjusted by the utility on
the basis of all available information concerning the use of service by the
customer.
      (2)   Whenever the utility has overcharged any customer as the result of
a meter or metering inaccuracy or other continuing problem under its control,
the utility will, for the period of time that incorrect billings can be
established, adjust the meter readings and billings to reflect available
information concerning the actual use by the customer.  The reimbursement of
overcharges shall take the form of a credit to the customer's account.
      (3)   Except as provided below, any underpayment as a result of a meter
or metering inaccuracy, or other continuing problem, will be billed to the
customer.  The utility will, at the customer's request, attempt to arrange a
reasonable payment schedule in the event of underpayment.  Should the amount of
the adjustment be under bona fide dispute, the utility shall continue to supply
service and the customer shall continue to pay all amounts billed until a final
determination is made.
      (4)   Whenever the utility has undercharged any customer as the result of
a meter or metering inaccuracy or other continuing problem under its control,
the utility may only bill the customer for the amount of the unmetered
electricity rendered in the 365 days immediately prior to the date the utility
remedies the meter inaccuracy.  The utility, in the first bill to collect the
amount for unmetered electric service, shall state the entire amount that it
seeks to collect.  The maximum portion of the undercharge for unmetered
electricity rendered that may be recovered from the customer in any billing
month shall be determined by dividing the amount of the undercharge by 12 (or
the corresponding number of adjustable months) and the quotient is the maximum
portion of the undercharge that the company may recover from the customer in
any billing month, in addition to either regular monthly charges of any type or
regular level payment amounts billed in accordance with an agreement between
the customer and the company.  The time period over which the undercharge may
be billed shall be 12 months (or the corresponding number of adjustable
months).
      (5)   The utility shall not recover any interest charge, service charge
or fee, whether or not a percentage is utilized for its computation, for the
portion of billings due to incorrect meter readings as provided for under this
section.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the customer
from paying an undercharge or any portion thereof in a time shorter than that
stated in this section.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the utility from collecting an undercharge or any portion thereof in a time
longer than that stated in this section.
      (7)   This section does not apply to any act that is a theft offense as
defined in §
1050.03 of these rules and regulations that involves tampering with utility
equipment or theft of utility service, or where a physical act of a customer or
its agent causes inaccurate or non-recording of the meter reading, or
inaccurate or no measurement of the gas or electricity rendered.
   (e)   Payment of bills.  The customer shall pay bills at the utility office
during the regular office hours or to any of the utility's authorized
collecting agent during the regular office hours of the agent.  Any remittance
received by mail at any office of the utility bearing U.S. Postal Office
cancellation date corresponding with or previous to the last date on which the
bill is payable "net" will be accepted as within the net payment period.
   (f)   Initial and final meter readings.
      (1)   When service is terminated for any reason, the utility will render
a final bill  addressed to the customer's forwarding address, if known, or to
the last known address, for the entire balance of the account, including a
calculation from the last reading date to the requested final bill date.  The
customer may request that the utility attempt to obtain an actual final meter
reading.  However, the utility may estimate the reading for the final bill
date.
      (2)   When the customer begins use of service, an initial bill is
normally rendered for the period from the initial date of service to the first
regular meter reading date, this period normally being less than 30 days,
except no bill will be rendered if the period is less than three days. 
However, the bill for customer's usage for that unbilled period will be
included and billed in the next month's bill.
      (3)   The utility may estimate the reading for the initial date of
service.  However, upon customer's request, the utility will attempt to obtain
an actual reading at the initial date of service.
   (g)   Deposits.
      (1)   A deposit of $100.00 shall be for the following utility service
when combined with water and/or sewer:
         A.   Electric.
      (2)   A deposit of $200.00 shall be for the following utility service:
         A.   Electric only.
      (3)   A deposit not exceeding $300.00 for a combined utility service of
electric, water, and sewer for residential customers or 150% of an estimated
average bill for commercial and industrial customers (unless the service is
temporary), may be required of the customer at any time, or from time to time
before or after service is commenced.  Deposit criteria will be affected by but
not limited to:
         A.   Past general credit history;
         B.   Past payment history (with the utility);
         C.   End use of service; and
         D.   Duration of service.
      (4)   The utility office shall have a reasonable time in which to
ascertain that the obligations of the customer have been fully performed before
being required to return any deposit.  The deposit shall be credited to the
customer’s account when payments have been made by the due date on 12
consecutive months, unless the customer’s account has been terminated. Where
the account has been terminated, any remaining deposit not used to credit the
account shall be directly reimbursed to the customer within 30 calendar days.
      (5)   There shall be no interest paid or accrued on deposits.
      (6)   Losses incurred by the utilities because of the insufficiency of
the utilities deposit to cover unpaid charges shall be distributed
proportionately among the three utilities.
   (h)   Charges and payment for temporary service.
      (1)   In addition to regular payments for electricity used, the customer
may pay the cost for all material, labor and other necessary expenses incurred
by the utility in supplying service to the customer at his or her request for
any temporary purpose to use (one year or less).  The utility may, at its
option, require that any customer for temporary service deposit with the
utility a sum equal to the utility's estimate of the cost to be incurred by it
for temporary service.
      (2)   After the service has been discontinued and all actual costs
determined, any sum deposited by the customer in excess of the actual cost
shall be refunded to him.  If the utility elects to leave in place any or all
of the facilities provided, constructed or installed to render such temporary
service, an amount of the customer's deposit shall be returned to the customer
such that the customer shall only be charged for the facilities not retained.
   (i)   Right to discontinue service.
      (1)   After giving notice as specified below, the utility shall have the
right to discontinue service for any of the following reasons or purposes:
         A.   Refusing reasonable access to the utility's facilities;
         B.   Non-payment of bills for service when bills are due;
         C.   Failure to furnish or maintain a required security deposit; and
         D.   Material violation of any of these rules and regulations not
otherwise covered in this provision.
      (2)   The utility shall have the right, without notice, to discontinue
service and disconnect and remove from the premises of a customer, the meter
and any other property belonging to the utility for any of the following
reasons or purposes:
         A.   Non-use of service;
         B.   Fraudulent representation or practice and theft of service; and
         C.   Whenever deemed necessary by the utility for safety reasons.
   (j)   Termination procedures.
      (1)   It is determined that a customer is delinquent in rendering payment
for service when the billing for service remains unpaid after five business
days from the due date.  Whenever a customer is delinquent in providing payment
for service from the due date of the bill, the utility shall mail a delinquency
notice to the customer (and landlord/customer if applicable).
      (2)   The utility may, after proper and reasonable notice of pending
termination of service (not less than ten days), terminate the customer's
service during normal utility business hours in compliance with the following
conditions:
         A.   No delinquent bill disconnection may be made after 12:30 p.m. on
the day preceding a day that all services necessary for the customer to arrange
and the utility to perform a reconnection are not regularly performed.
         B.   Those utility employees who normally perform the termination of
service will be authorized to make available to the customer, means to avoid
disconnection.  Such employees at the premises shall not be authorized to make
extended payment arrangements.
         C.   In conjunction with service to the customer of the termination
notice provided for herein, the utility shall advise the customer of the
business address, telephone number, business hours and a utility representative
to be contacted in the event the customer desires to dispute the reasons for
the termination and of the customer's right to complain or appeal to Council
should he or she be dissatisfied with the utility's reasons for terminating
service.  Upon request of the customer, the utility shall provide an
opportunity for review of the initial decision concerning the dispute.
         D.   The notice of termination sent to the service address (and
billing address, if different) shall be in writing, and shall identify the
amount owed, the date which service may be terminated, and the reason for
termination.
      (3)   Termination of service for nonpayment is prohibited without the
approval of Council when the termination of service would make operation of
necessary medical or life-supporting equipment, known by the utility to be in
service, impossible or impractical.  Service shall not be terminated if the
customer enters into and makes payments in accordance with an extended payment
plan.
      (4)   If a guarantor is required in order to reestablish service, the
guarantor must sign an acknowledgment or willingness to accept the
responsibility for payment of the customer's bill in case of the customer's
default.
   (k)   Landlord-tenant provision.  The utility may terminate utility service
to individuals whose utility services are included in rental payments and of
customers residing in master-metered premises owned by landlord/customers, in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   The utility has provided the notice(s) to the landlord/customer. 
The utility, in its delinquency notice must also:
         A.   Summarize the remedies tenants may choose to prevent
disconnection or to have service reconnected; and
         B.   Inform tenants that a list of procedures and forms to prevent
disconnection or to have service reconnected are available from the utility
upon request.
      (2)   Customers inquiring in response to the posted notice required in
division (k)(1)A. of this section shall be informed of the amount due for the
current month's service and that by submitting a single payment to the utility
in that amount, tenants may prevent disconnection of service.
      (3)   Payment by tenants equal to or exceeding the landlord/customers'
current electric service bill for those premises shall be credited to the
appropriate account, provided that the utility is under no obligation to accept
partial payment from individual tenants and may choose to accept only a single
payment from the representative acting on behalf of all the tenants.
      (4)   The utility shall not disconnect service to master-metered premises
when:
         A.   A tenant delivers to the utility a copy of the written notice
signed by 50% or more of the tenants of the occupied dwelling units, which
notice shall designate the imminent disconnection of utility service (as shown
by the disconnection notices received) as a reason for the notice;
         B.   A tenant informs the utility, in writing, of the date of the last
day on which rent may be paid before a penalty is assessed or the date on which
default on the lease or rental agreement can be claimed; and
         C.   The tenants who sign the disconnection notice timely invoke the
remedies provided below:
            1.   Deposit all rent that is due and thereafter becomes due to the
landlord, with the Clerk of the municipal or county court having jurisdiction;
and
            2.   Apply to the court for an order to use the rent deposited to
remedy the condition or conditions specified in the tenant's notice to the
landlord (including but not necessarily limited to payment to the utility
rendering the disconnection notice).
      (5)   If service has been terminated to customers whose utility services
are included in rental payments or who are residing in master-metered premises,
the utility shall inform the customers upon their inquiry that service will be
reconnected upon payment of the amount due for the current month's service plus
any reconnection charge if the payment is made within 14 days of termination,
and that service will continue so long as payment for each month's service
(based upon actual or estimated consumption) is made by the tenant's
representative by the due date of the bill thereof.  If the customers choose to
have their service reconnected by paying the current month's bill and payment
is not made by the due date of each month, the utility shall post the notice in
a conspicuous location on the premises and make a good faith effort by mail or
otherwise, to notify each household unit of a multi-unit dwelling or tenant
receiving service in the master-metered premises of the impending service
termination.  The utility shall not be required to reconnect service pursuant
to this division where the landlord resides on the premises.
      (6)   Concurrent with the effective date of this rule, the landlord/
customer must be the designated customer on all new applications accepted by
the utility for service to residential master-metered premises.  Utility
acceptance of new applications for service to master-metered premises requires
the designated landlord/customer to provide to the utility an accurate list
specifying the individual mailing addresses of each unit served at the master-
metered premises.  The list must be updated by the landlord/customer in a
timely fashion.
   (l)   Change of address of customer.  When a customer changes his or her
address, he or she shall give notice of his or her intent to do so to the
utility prior to the date of change.  The customer shall be responsible for all
service supplied to the former premises until the notice has been received and
the utility has had a reasonable time, but not less than three regular business
days, to discontinue service.
   (m)   Change in tenancy or ownership.  At such time as the utility is
notified of a change of tenancy or ownership, the utility shall make a final
meter reading and prepare and mail a final bill.  The former customer is
responsible for all service supplied to the premises until the notice has been
received and the utility has had a reasonable time to make a final meter
reading.  "Reasonable time" is defined as being three regular business days.
(Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001; Ord. 54-2002, passed 12-2-2002; Ord. 30-2016,
passed 12-5-2016)
§ 1050.05  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   These rules and regulations are subject to, and include as part
thereof, all orders, rules and regulations applicable to the utility from time
to time issued or established by the City Council under its emergency powers.
   (b)   The utility reserves the right to make such further policies
regulating electric service in order to carry out the purposes of these rules
and regulations as experience may suggest, and as the utility may deem
necessary or convenient in the conduct of its business.
   (c)   These rules and regulations shall not apply during periods of shortage
in the supply of electricity available to the utility, to the extent that
compliance by the utility with such rules and regulations is precluded by the
shortage in supply.  During periods of shortage of supply to the utility,
restrictions on new service and curtailment of existing service shall be
governed strictly by the utility.
   (d)   Disputes arising from the rules and regulations between customers and
the utility shall be resolved, to the best of its ability, by utility
personnel.  Decisions or actions taken by utility personnel may be appealed by
the customer to the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001)
§ 1050.06  PHOTOVOLTAIC AND WIND GENERATION INTERCONNECTION GENERAL
REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general requirements shall govern the interconnection of
photovoltaic (PV) and wind energy systems to the City of Shelby’s electric
distribution systems.
   (a)   PV/Wind system output size.
      (1)   Residential. As determined by the property’s historic billing and
Shelby Division of Electricity and Telecommunications system requirements with
a maximum of 10kW.
      (2)   Commercial/Industrial. As determined by the property’s historic
billing and Shelby Division of Electricity and Telecommunications system
requirements with a maximum of 100kW.
   (b)   PV/Wind Inverter Output Voltage (AC) shall be 240 VAC nominal
residential and 208/240/480 VAC commercial.
   (c)   The sources for distributed generation system standards are National
Electric Code (NEC), Institute of Electric and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
Underwriters Laboratory (UL), American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
National Electric Safety Code (NESC), International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), and American Wind Energy Association (AWEA).
      (1)   PV systems shall meet the following standards: NEC 690 & 705, IEEE
1547, UL1741, UL1703, ANSI & NESC along with all applicable state and local
standards.
      (2)   Wind turbine systems shall meet the following standards: NEC 694 &
705, IEEE 1547, UL1741, UL6142, IEC 61400, AWEA, ANSI & NESC along with all
applicable state and local standards.
      (3)   Voltage range shall meet the following requirements:
 
Voltage Range (% Nominal) Max. Clearing Time (sec)*
V <50%                    0.16
50%≤V<110%              2.0
110%<V<120%               1.0
V≥120%                  0.16
 
(*)   Max clearing times for distributed energy resources <30kW;
   Default clearing times for Distributed energy resources >30kW
      (4)   Frequency range shall meet the following requirements:
 
Frequency Range (Hz) Max. Clearing Time (sec)
f  > 60.5           0.16
f < 57.0*            0.16
59.8 < f < 57.0**    Adjustable
                     (0.16 and 300)
 
(*)   59.3 Hz if distributed energy resources < 30kW;
(**)   For distributed energy resources > 30kW
      (5)   Voltage control is not permitted (IEEE 1547).
      (6)   Flicker shall not exceed maximum borderline of irritation curve
(IEEE 1453).
      (7)   Harmonics (IEEE 519) shall meet the following requirements:
         A.   < 5% THD.
         B.   < 4% below 11th harmonic.
         C.   < 2% for 11th - 15th harmonic.
         D.   < 1.5% for 17th - 21st harmonic.
         E.   < 0.6% for 23rd - 33rd harmonic.
         F.   < 0.3% for 33rd and greater harmonic.
      (8)   Current imbalance shall meet the latest requirements for the
following:
         A.   Current imbalance shall not be greater than 10%.
         B.   NEC.
         C.   IEEE.
         D.   NESC.
         E.   Local fire department.
      (9)   Grouping of disconnects.  The DC disconnect (PV array/wind output),
AC disconnect (inverter output), and revenue meter shall be grouped within ten
feet of one another on the side of the building.  The disconnects shall be
permanently and clearly identified as to their purpose.
(Ord. 25-2016, passed 10-3-2016)
§ 1050.07  NET METERING SCHEDULE.
   Customers who generate a portion or all of their own electrical needs and
provide any excess generation to the City of Shelby’s system shall receive a
billing credit equal to the city’s wholesale cost of energy, adjusted to
include line losses. This billing credit shall be provided to the customer
under a net metering rate schedule subject to the following terms and
conditions:
   (a)   Limitations.  Billing under this schedule is limited to customers who
operate a generating facility utilizing renewable energy source electric
generating technology.  The eligible facilities must be installed on the
customer’s premises. The maximum size of the electric generation eligible for
net metering is 10 kW or under for residential units and 100 kW or under for
commercial or industrial units. To qualify for this schedule, customer’s non-
dispatchable (solar/wind) generating units will be limited in size, not to
exceed customer’s annual self-service energy needs, measured in kWh. The
customer property at the distributed generation site’s usage history over the
last three years, if available, shall be used as a benchmark for determining
this kWh total. If a customer has more than one generator, to qualify for this
schedule, the total capacity of the generators shall be less than the maximum
listed above. The City of Shelby may restrict or deny service under this
schedule once the total connected generation provided under this schedule
equals or exceeds 1% of the City of Shelby’s previous year’s peak demand.  The
customer’s facility must comply with the City of Shelby’s existing
interconnection rules and regulations.
   (b)   Monthly rate.  Deliveries from the city to the customer shall be
billed in accordance with the standard applicable rate schedules. 
   (c)   Customer credits for net excess generation (NEG).  Net excess
generation (NEG) represents the amount of electric generation by the customer
beyond the customer’s own metered usage which is delivered to the City of
Shelby during the billing period.  Deliveries from the customer to the City of
Shelby shall be credited at the wholesale purchase price (base rate) of
electricity purchased by the City of Shelby for the month of the billing cycle.
The credit to the customer shall not exceed the dollar amount the City of
Shelby bills the customer for energy consumption in any billing period. 
Instead, the net excess dollar amount shall be allowed to accumulate as an NEG
credit to offset the customer’s energy charges in the next billing period.  The
credit will be adjusted based on the currently used power cost adjustment. NEG
credits, if any, will be carried over from month to month. Upon an account
being closed, a final kWh reading shall be taken from the net electric meter.
If the accumulative kWh balance is a credit owed to the account holder, the net
kWh credits due, shall be paid to the account holder. The amount owed to the
account holder shall be calculated by multiplying the final net kWh balance by
the most recent fuel and purchase power cost adjustment. The sum will be the
amount owed to the account holder. The credit shall be paid within 60 days
after the account is closed.
(Ord. 25-2016, passed 10-3-2016)
§ 1050.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 33-2001, passed 8-20-2001)
CHAPTER 1052:  UTILITY PAYMENT ASSISTANCE
Section
   
1052.01   Sharing Fund established
§ 1052.01  SHARING FUND ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The Sharing Fund is hereby established to assist utility customers who
are unable to pay their utility bills and so as to reduce loss and increase
revenue in the utility funds.
   (b)   The Sharing Fund shall be established and shall operate upon a
charitable/donative principle whereby those who are willing and able will
donate $1 per month to be added to the Sharing Fund.
   (c)   Any and all moneys generated as a result of the Sharing Fund as well
as any other donations received for the same purpose shall be deposited in a
separate fund which shall be called the "City of Shelby's The Sharing Fund"
(Sharing Fund), and the fund is hereby so established and created.
   (d)   All moneys deposited in the city Sharing Fund shall be utilized to
assist needy and deserving city utility customers with the payment of their
city utility bills.
   (e)    The city may seek and engage the services of charitable and/or
nonprofit organizations to assist city officers and/or employees in determining
how and when disbursements are to be made from the Sharing Fund. The Director
of Public Service is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules as are
necessary to implement this section.
   (f)   Any city utility customer that does not desire to participate in the
City of Shelby Sharing Fund charitable/donative program shall have the right to
opt out of the program and the method of opting out shall be available at any
time to any customer during his or her usage of and payment for Shelby
utilities. Further, all Shelby utility customers shall be advised of the
existence of the Sharing Fund and the method of participating or opting out.
   (g)   The Sharing Fund program shall begin during the first billing cycle
following the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 26-2009, passed 9-8-2009)
CHAPTER 1054: RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT
Section
   
1054.01   Definitions
   
1054.02   Purpose and scope of chapter
   
1054.03   Prohibition; types of permits
   
1054.04   Application procedure; appeal
   
1054.05   Criteria for granting permits
   
1054.06   Obligations of permittees; conditions of permits
   
1054.07   Permit fees and auditing
   
1054.08   Micro wireless facility
   
1054.09   Joint planning and construction
   
1054.10   Construction permits
   
1054.11   Construction, relocation, and restoration
   
1054.12   Minor maintenance permit
   
1054.13   Enforcement of permit obligation
   
1054.14   Construction and removal bonds
   
1054.15   Reporting requirements
   
1054.16   Compensation
   
1054.17   City use of facilities
   
1054.18   Adoption of regulations
   
1054.19   Indemnity; insurance
   
1054.20   Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities
   
1054.21   Revocation
   
1054.22   Reservation of rights
   
1054.23   Temporary movement of facilities
   
1054.24   Assignment or transfer of ownership; renewal
   
1054.25   Foreclosure and receivership
   
1054.26   Unauthorized use of right-of-way
   
1054.27   General provisions
   
1054.99   Penalty
§ 1054.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations have the meanings set forth herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may"
is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
   (a)   “Accessory equipment” means any equipment used in conjunction with a
wireless facility or wireless support structure. “Accessory equipment” includes
utility or transmission equipment, power storage, generation or control
equipment, cables, wiring and equipment cabinets.
   (b)   “Antenna” means communications equipment that transmits or receives
radio frequency signals in the provision of wireless service.
   (c)   “Applicant” means any person applying for a right-of-way occupancy
permit hereunder.
   (d)   “Best efforts” means the best reasonable efforts under the
circumstances, taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all
applicable laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes,
expedition, available technology and human resources and cost.
   (e)   “Cable operator, cable service, and franchise” have the same meaning
as set forth in the "Cable Communications and Policy Act of 1984," 98 stat.
2779, 47 U.S.C.A. 522.
   (f)   “Chapter” means
Chapter 1054 of the Codified Ordinances of the City, as amended from time to
time, and any regulations adopted hereunder.
   (g)   “City” means the City of Shelby, Ohio.
   (h)   “Collocation” means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.
   (i)   “Confidential/proprietary information” means all information that has
been either identified or clearly marked as confidential/proprietary
information by the provider prior to any submission. Information that is
considered by a provider to be either trade secret, confidential and/or
proprietary, or information that upon public disclosure would be highly likely
to place critical portions of a provider's system in material danger of
vandalism, sabotage, or an act of terrorism, all may be marked as confidential/
proprietary information by a provider when submitted. Upon receipt of such
clearly marked confidential/ proprietary information from a provider, the city
shall endeavor, in accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code,
R.C. Chapter 149 (the Ohio Public Records Act), to use all the same reasonable
measures and exercise the same degree of care that the city uses to protect its
own information of such a nature from disclosure to third parties. In the event
that the city receives a request from a third party for disclosure of
information a provider has clearly marked as confidential/proprietary
information, then the city shall respond as required by R.C. Chapter 149, but
will attempt to use all reasonable means to notify the provider as soon as
possible.
   (j)   “Construct” includes, but shall not be limited to, digging, boring,
tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing
conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles,
installing signs or installing facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental
plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the
right-of-way. “Construct” shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting
into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the
right-of-way.
   (k)   “Construction” includes, but not limited to, the act or process of
digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing
wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines,
installing poles, installing signs or installing facilities, other than
landscaping, ornamental plantings in, above, within, over, below, under or
through any part of the right-of-way. “Construction” shall also include the act
of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface
that is part of the right-of-way.
   (l)   “Construction bond” is a bond posted to ensure proper and complete
construction and/or repair of a facility and the affected right-of-way pursuant
to a permit.
   (m)   “Council” means the legislative body of the city.
   (n)   “Decorative pole” means a pole, arch, or structure other than a street
light pole placed in the public way specifically designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been
placed. This does not include structures for electric lighting, specifically
designed informational or directional signage, or temporary holiday or special
event attachments.
   (o)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service, Shelby, Ohio, or
designee.
   (p)   “Eligible facilities request,” as defined in federal law, in 47 U.S.C.
1455(a)(2), any request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base
station that involves: (1) co-location of new transmission equipment, (2)
removal of transmission equipment, or (3) replacement transmission equipment.
   (q)   “Emergency” is a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to
life or health, or a significant loss of property.
   (r)   “Facility(ies)” means any tangible thing located in any right-of-way
within the city; but shall not include boulevard plantings, ornamental
plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a
person's property and the street edge of pavement.
   (s)   “Force majeure” means a strike, act of God, act of public enemy, riot,
epidemic, landslides, lightning, earthquake, fire, tornado, storm, flood, civil
disturbance, explosion, partial or entire failure of a utility or any other
cause or event not reasonably within the control of the party disabled by such
force majeure, but only to the extent such disabled party notifies the other
party as soon as practicable regarding such force majeure and then for only so
long as and to the extent that, the force majeure prevents compliance or causes
noncompliance with the provisions hereof.
   (t)   “General right-of-way occupancy permit” shall have the meaning set
forth in §
1054.03(c)(1).
   (u)   “Governmental purposes” means those purposes classified as
governmental under Ohio law, as well as water utility service, sanitary sewer
service, electric service, storm sewers, automatic meter reading service, and
any other city utility service to the extent such other city utility service is
provided to city facilities.
   (v)   “Historic district” means a building, property, or site, or group of
buildings, properties, or sites that are either listed in the National Register
of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of
the National Register, or designated a historic district as defined in R.C. §
149.311.
   (w)   “Mayor” means the Mayor or the Acting Mayor of the City of Shelby,
Ohio
   (x)   “Micro wireless facility” means a small cell facility that is not more
than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that
does not have an exterior antenna more than 11 inches in length suspended on
cable strung between wireless support structures.
   (y)   “Micro wireless facility operator” means a public utility or cable
operator that operates a micro wireless facility.
   (z)   “Minor maintenance permit” means a permit, which must be obtained
before a person can perform minor maintenance, as set forth in §
1054.12, in or on the right-of-way.
   (aa)   “Municipal electric utility” has the same meaning as set forth in
R.C. § 4928.01.
   (bb)   “Municipal electric utility pole” means a utility pole, as defined
herein, that is owned or operated by the municipal electric utility.
   (cc)   “Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTCD)” means the
uniform system of traffic control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09.
   (dd)   “Permit” is a construction permit or a minor maintenance permit, as
the context requires.
   (ee)   “Permit cost” means all direct, incidental, and indirect costs
actually incurred or realized by the city for permit issuance, permit oversight
and pavement degradation resulting from construction activity.
   (ff)   “Permit fee” is money paid to the city for a permit to construct in
the rights-of-way as required by this chapter.
   (gg)   “Permittee” means any person issued a right-of-way occupancy permit
pursuant to this chapter to use or occupy all or a portion of the right- of-way
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and said right-of-way permit.
   (hh)   “Person” means any natural person or any association, firm,
partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity,
whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
   (ii)   “Public property” means any real property owned by the city or
easements held or used by the city, other than a right-of-way.
   (jj)   “Public utility” means any company described in R.C. § 4905.03,
except in divisions (B) and (I) of that section, which company also is a
"public utility" as defined in R.C. § 4905.02 and regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission of Ohio; and includes any electric supplier as defined in
R.C. § 4933.81.
   (kk)   “Registration maintenance fee” means the money paid to the city to
maintain a right-of-way occupancy permit and compensate the city for all actual
costs incurred by the city in the management, administration and control of the
right-of-way of the city, and which are not reasonably recoverable by the city
through construction permit fees or other approved recovery mechanisms.
   (ll)   “Regulation” means any rule adopted by the Director pursuant to the
authority of this chapter, and the procedure set forth in §
1054.10, to carry out its purpose and intent.
   (mm)   “Residential purposes” means residential use of right-of-way for such
uses as mailboxes, trees, decorative purposes or any curb cuts and driveways,
and as may be further defined in the regulations.
   (nn)   “Restoration” means the process and the resultant effects by which a
right-of-way is returned to a condition as good as or better than its condition
immediately prior to the construction. Restoration shall occur in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations as may be enacted or amended from time to time.
   (oo)   “Right-of-way” means the surface of and the space above and below the
paved or unpaved portions of any public street, public road, public highway,
public freeway, public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public
court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, and any
other land dedicated or otherwise designated for the same now or hereafter held
by the city which shall, within its proper use and meaning in the sole opinion
of the Director, entitle a permittee, in accordance with the terms hereof and
of any right-of- way occupancy permit, to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing or operating any poles, wires, cables, transformers, conductors,
ducts, lines, mains, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, or other property or facilities as may be ordinarily necessary and
pertinent to the provision of natural gas, electric, cable television,
communications, or other utility services as set forth in any right-of-way
occupancy permit. “Right-of-way” shall not include private easements or public
property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is
specifically granted in a right-of-way occupancy permit or by regulation.
   (pp)   “Right-of-way occupancy permit” means the non-exclusive grant of
authority to use or occupy all or a portion of the city's rights-of-way granted
pursuant to this chapter.
   (qq)   “Right-of-way related costs” means all documented direct, incidental,
and indirect costs actually borne by the city for the control, management and
administration of the rights-of-way.
   (rr)   “Small cell facility” means a wireless facility that meets both of
the following:
      (1)   Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an
enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
could fit within an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for power and other
services.
   (ss)   “Small cell facility operator” means a wireless service provider, or
its designated agent, or cable operator of its designated agent, or a video
service provider or its designated agent, that operates a small cell facility
and provides wireless service as defined in R.C. Chapter 4939, to the extent it
is still in effect. This includes a wireless service provider, cable operator
or a video service provider that provides information services as defined in
110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. 153(20) and services that are fixed in nature of use
unlicensed spectrum.
   (tt)   “Supplementary application” means any application made to construct
on or in more of the rights-of-way than previously allowed, or to extend a
permit that had already been issued.
   (uu)   “Trenchless technology” includes, but is not limited to, the use of
directional boring, horizontal drilling, microtunneling, and other techniques
in the construction of underground portions of facilities which result in the
least amount of disruption and damage to rights-of-way as possible.
   (vv)   “Underground facility(ies)” means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes,
posts, tanks, vaults, and any other facilities which are located wholly or
partially underneath rights-of-way.
   (ww)   “Unused facility(ies)” means facilities located in the rights-of-way
which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the provider is unable
to provide the city with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the
provider intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12
months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will
be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or that the
availability of such facilities is required by the provider to adequately and
efficiently operate its system.
   (xx)   “Utility pole” means a structure that is designed for, or used for
the purpose of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or
telecommunications service. This does not include structures owned or operated
by a municipal electric utility ("municipal electric utility poles"), street
signs, or decorative poles.
   (yy)   “Wireless facility” means equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network.
This includes equipment associated with wireless communications, radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies and comparable equipment (regardless of technological configuration),
and small cell facilities. This does not include the structure or improvements
on, under, or within which the equipment is located, and coaxial or fiber-optic
cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular
antenna.
   (zz)   “Wireless service” means any services using licensed or unlicensed
wireless spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the
public using wireless facilities.
   (aaa)   “Wireless service provider” means a person who provides wireless
service as defined in R.C. § 4927.01(A)(20), to the extent it is still in
effect.
   (bbb)   “Wireless support structure” means a pole, such as a monopole,
either guyed or self- supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15-
foot or taller sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting small cell
facilities. For purposes of requesting consent for micro wireless facility
activity "wireless support structure" excludes: (1) a municipal electric
utility pole, or other facility owned or operated by a municipal electric
utility; and (2) a utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power
to public transit systems including railways, trams, streetcars, and
trolleybuses.
   (ccc)   “Work permit or construction permit” means to permit to perform work
in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the public
way, including, but not limited to the act or process of digging, boring,
tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, or installing, as well as the
act of opening and cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface
that is part of the public way.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.02  PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of the
use or occupation of all rights-of-way in the city, the issuance of right-of-
way permits to persons for such use or occupancy, and to set forth the policies
of the city related thereto.
   (b)   A right-of-way occupancy permit issued pursuant to this chapter does
not take the place of any franchise, license, or permit which may be
additionally required by law, including any required by city ordinance. A
right-of-way occupancy permit issued pursuant to this chapter also does not
grant pole attachment rights or preclude the need to enter into a public and/or
private pole attachment agreements. Each permittee shall obtain any and all
such additional state, federal or city franchises, licenses or permits
necessary to the operation and conduct of its business or the occupation or use
of any right-of-way; provided, however, that no permittee holding a valid
right-of-way permit shall be required to obtain a franchise for any type of
services rendered by said permittee for which the city did not require a
franchise at the time said permittee's permit was last issued or renewed.
Should there be a direct conflict between the provisions of this chapter and a
valid franchise, the provisions of the franchise shall prevail; provided,
however, that additional obligations shall not be construed as a conflict.
   (c)   The Director, or designee, is hereby directed and empowered to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   The city's policy regarding rights-of- way is:
      (1)   To promote the utilization of rights-of-way for the public health,
safety, and welfare and to promote economic development in the city;
      (2)   To promote the availability of a wide range of utility,
telecommunication and other services, including the rapid deployment of new
technologies and innovative services to the city's residents and taxpayers at
reasonable costs;
      (3)   To promote cooperation among the permittees and the city in the
occupation of rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to minimize public
inconvenience during right-of-way work, and eliminate wasteful, unnecessary or
unsightly duplication of facilities;
      (4)   To promote public safety and protect public property;
      (5)   To ensure adequate public reimbursement of costs the city has
incurred for private use of the rights-of-way, including the regulation
thereof;
      (6)   To promote and require reasonable accommodation of all uses of
rights- of-way, and when all requests for right-of-way use cannot be
accomplished, to give priority for use of rights-of-way, in the order
indicated, from highest to lowest, to the following users:
         A.   The city for governmental purposes;
         B.   Another governmental entity for governmental purposes with the
city's concurrence, or other governmental use required by law;
         C.   General right-of-way occupancy permittees and proprietary uses by
the city;
      (7)   To assure that applicants have the financial, technical, and
managerial resources to comply with this chapter and the provisions of any
right-of-way occupancy permit issued hereunder; for purposes of this chapter,
an applicant possessing valid certification from the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio, including certification pursuant to R.C. §
4933.81 et seq., and is recognized on the rolls of the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio as a regulated utility or of a cable operator possessing a
valid franchise awarded pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, for the services to be provided by the facilities subject to this chapter
shall be presumed to possess the requisite financial, technical and managerial
resources.
      (8)   To ensure that access to and occupancy or use of the public right-
of-way advances the State of Ohio policies specified in R.C. §§ 4927.02,
4928.02, and 4929.02.
      (9)   To expedite the installation and operation of micro and smaller
wireless facilities in order to facilitate the deployment of advanced wireless
service throughout the State of Ohio.
   (e)   All right-of-way occupancy permits granted hereunder shall be non-
exclusive and no property right of any nature shall be created by the granting
of a permit under this chapter.
   (f)   This chapter does not apply, and nothing herein should be construed to
apply the provisions of this chapter, to structures or facilities owned or
operated by the city or any city operations that occupy or use the rights-of-
way. It is specifically contemplated, however, that all city departments or
divisions that utilize the rights-of-way shall carry out their operations in a
manner consistent with the policy set forth in this chapter, including
participation and cooperation in all joint planning hereunder and
identification of structures and facilities located in the rights-of-way.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.03  PROHIBITION; TYPES OF PERMITS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted pursuant to the City of Shelby, Ohio
Codified Ordinances, each person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use
the right-of-way to use, occupy, construct, own, or operate structures or
facilities located in, under or over the right-of-way or any public property
with the city, shall apply for and obtain a right-of-way occupancy permit
pursuant to this chapter. Any person owning, operating or maintaining
structures or facilities in the right-of-way without a right-of-way occupancy
permit, including persons operating under a permit, license, or franchise
issued by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter shall apply for
and obtain a right-of-way occupancy permit from the city, unless exempted by
this chapter. Application will consist of providing the information set forth
in this chapter and as reasonably required by the Mayor.
   (b)   Permits shall not be required for the following uses:
      (1)   Carts;
      (2)   Landscaping (may require a right-of-way work permit per this
chapter);
      (3)   Right angle signs and sidewalk signs;
      (4)   Awnings; and
      (5)   Residential purposes, so long as, in the opinion of the Mayor, the
residential use:
         A.   Has received or will receive all other necessary permits,
including any required by these Codified Ordinances;
         B.   Is not inconsistent with policy of the city;
         C.   Does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare;
and
         D.   Does not materially interfere with the other lawful use of the
right-of-way. The Director shall adopt regulations controlling and further
defining residential purposes and to otherwise implement the determinations to
be made under this section. Such regulations shall, among other matters,
specify that the owner of facilities that hold title to such facilities solely
as a result of a leaseback, defined as the sale or transfer of property by a
permittee to another person contemporaneously followed by the leasing of the
property to the permittee on a long-term basis, that are not operated or
controlled by said lessor, and are operated or controlled by the permittee, are
not considered to be using, occupying, owning or operating such facilities, for
purposes of this chapter, solely as a result of such leaseback.
   (c)   The following types of right-of-way occupancy permits are available:
      (1)   General right-of-way occupancy permit: A right-of-way occupancy
permit granted to persons who desire and are granted authority to utilize
rights-of-way generally for business purposes, including the provision of
utility, cable television, telecommunications, or other services to the city,
its residents, and taxpayers;
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed to preclude the city
from requiring any person offering any natural gas, electric, cable television,
telecommunications, or other utility services for which the city may lawfully
require a franchise, to acquire a franchise upon the expiration of any right-
of-way occupancy permit issued hereunder.
   (d)   Any such right-of-way occupancy permit may also allow the use of
specified public property for the uses set forth in the right-of-way occupancy
permit and in this chapter.
   (e)   Each right-of-way occupancy permit shall specify the use or uses for
which it is granted and contain such other non-discriminatory terms and
conditions as are appropriate and as are set forth in the regulations.
   (f)   Unless otherwise set forth herein, right-of-way occupancy permits or
the rights of a permittee thereunder are not transferable without the prior
express written approval of the Director, upon written request. Such request
shall contain evidence that the proposed transferee has the financial,
technical, and managerial resources to comply with the obligations of this
chapter and its right-of-way occupancy permit and shall be granted if such
transferee has such resources. In making said determination, a proposed
transferee shall be presumed to possess the requisite financial, technical, and
managerial resources if said transferee possesses a valid certification from
the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, including certification pursuant to
R.C. § 4933.81, et seq., and is recognized on the rolls of the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio as a regulated utility or of a cable operator possessing a
valid franchise awarded pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, for the services to be provided by the facilities subject to this
chapter. The Director shall adopt regulations providing procedures for transfer
of right-of-way occupancy permits that shall include provisions providing that
(i) all requests for transfer shall be deemed approved if the Director does not
disapprove the same within 30 days of receipt of the completed written transfer
request; and (ii) transfer to affiliates under common ownership and control
with the permittee shall not require approval, so long as the Director is
provided 30 days written notice of such transfer.
   (g)   Any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which
a right-of-way occupancy permit has not been obtained shall be deemed to be a
nuisance and an unauthorized use of the right-of-way. The city may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to
abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities and/or non-complying
portion of such facility; and/or prosecuting the violator.
   (h)   The Director shall adopt regulations controlling and further defining
residential purposes and to otherwise implement the determinations to be made
under this section. Such regulations shall, among other matters, specify: (i)
that the owner of facilities that hold title to such facilities solely as a
result of a leaseback, defined as the sale or transfer of property by a
permittee to another person contemporaneously followed by the leasing of the
property to the permittee on a long-term basis; and (ii) are operated or
controlled by the permittee, are not considered to be using, occupying, owing
or operating such facilities, for purposes of this chapter, solely as a result
of such leaseback.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.04  APPLICATION PROCEDURE; APPEAL.
   (a)   Applications for general right-of-way occupancy permits or amendments
or renewals thereof shall be filed in such form and in such manner as these
regulations require, along with an application fee of $250.00. The information
provided to the city at the time of application shall include but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Each applicant's name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation,
etc.), street address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a representative. The representative shall be available at all
times. Current information regarding how to contact the representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of application and shall be updated as
necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at
all times;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance where required to be provided to meet
the requirements of this chapter shall:
         A.   Verify that an insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of Ohio has issued an insurance policy to the applicant;
         B.   Verify that the applicant is insured on an occurrence basis
against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for
property damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors; and placement and
use of facilities in the right-of-way by the applicant, its officers, agents,
employees, and contractors, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from any and all operations, damage of underground facilities
and collapse of property;
         C.   Name the city, its elected officials, officers, employees,
agents, and volunteers as an additional insured as to whom the comprehensive
general liability and completed operation and products liability insurance
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverage, as is required within this chapter;
         D.   Require that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy. The liability insurance
policies required by this chapter shall contain the following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be diminished in
value, canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated, until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Director of Public Service or her/his
designee of such intent to cancel, diminish or not to renew."
Within 30 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later
than five days prior to said cancellation, the permittee (or applicant) shall
obtain and furnish to the Director of Public Service a certificate of insurance
evidencing replacement insurance policies;
      (4)   Documentation that applicant or permittee maintains standard
Workers' Compensation coverage as required by law. Similarly, permittee shall
require any subcontractor to provide Workers' Compensation coverage in amounts
required by law for all of the subcontractor's employees;
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, upon specific request of the city,
a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent) as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State (or legal equivalent) in
the state or country in which incorporated;
      (6)   A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the PUCO and/
or the FCC and/or FERC, if the person is lawfully required to have or actually
does possess such certificate from said commission(s);
      (7)   Upon request of the city, a narrative (or if applicable PUCO/FCC/
FERC application information) describing applicant's proposed activities in the
city including credible information detailing applicant's financial,
managerial, and technical ability to fulfill applicant's obligations under this
chapter and carry on applicant's proposed activities.
   (b)   The Director, or designee, shall determine if the application is in
order and shall, within 30 days of the receipt of a completed application,
issue a written report regarding such application. The report shall recommend
that the City Council deny or grant the right-of-way occupancy permit, subject
to any appropriate terms and conditions, in accordance with the criteria set
forth in this chapter. The Director's report shall be served upon the applicant
by mail along with a notice of when the City Council will consider the same.
The City Council shall then consider such recommendation and make a final
determination at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting, as to whether or
not such right-of-way occupancy permit should be granted and, if so, upon what
terms and conditions. City Council shall make a final determination within 60
days of receipt of the completed application by the Director. Should the city
receive a number of requests for consent for small cell facilities or wireless
support structures to the extent it is likely to result in difficulty
processing, the city may toll the requests consistent with R.C. § 4939.036. The
term of each such general right-of-way permit for wireless support structure
attachments shall be for ten years from issuance, or such lesser term as the
applicant requests. There is a presumption of renewal following the initial ten
year term for successive five year terms, subject, however to any terms
providing for early termination or nonrenewal for cause or by mutual agreement
or to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   Any applicant may appeal the failure of the Director to recommend an
application be granted upon terms and conditions acceptable to the applicant,
to the Mayor. In order to perfect such appeal, the applicant shall file, within
ten days of the Director's determination or recommendation, or within 30 days
of the filing of the application if the Director has taken no action, an appeal
to the Mayor. The Mayor shall then review the matter and after affording the
applicant an opportunity to be heard either in person or in writing, render a
final recommendation that shall be submitted to City Council within 15 days of
the Director's receipt of the request for an appeal unless such period is
waived by the applicant. City Council shall consider the appeal request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the Directors recommendation.
Except to the extent otherwise appealable by law, the City Council's decision
shall be final. If a request for consent is denied for an activity described in
R.C. § 4939.031, the reasons for denial, required under this division, shall be
provided to the applicant in writing, and shall set forth the reasons for
denying the request for consent in a manner supported by substantial, competent
evidence, and the denial of the request shall not unduly discriminate against
the applicant.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.05  CRITERIA FOR GRANTING PERMITS.
   (a)   A general right-of-way occupancy permit shall be granted to an
applicant upon a determination that:
      (1)   The granting of the right-of- way occupancy permit will contribute
to the public health, safety, or welfare in the city;
      (2)   The granting of the right-of- way occupancy permit will be
consistent with the policy of the city as set forth in §
1054.02(d);
      (3)   The applicant is not delinquent on any right-of-way permit fees or
costs owed the city for right-of-way related activity and, except in the case
of entities subject to the jurisdiction and recognized on the rolls of the
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as a regulated utility or of a cable
operator possessing a valid franchise awarded pursuant to the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C.A. 541, has the
requisite financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all its
obligations hereunder;
      (4)   The applicant's right-of-way occupancy permit would not be granted
for placement of a small cell facility or wireless support structure above
ground, in an area that has been designated solely for undergrounding; and
      (5)   The applicant of the right-of- way occupancy permit is in
compliance with the city's written design guidelines to match the aesthetics
and character of the immediate area including other ground-mounted small cell
facilities, the location of small cell facilities on wireless support
structures, appearance and concealment measures, meets the design or
concealment measures required for a Historic District, and the design and
appearance of the wireless support structure including height requirements.
   (b)   A right-of-way occupancy permit shall not convey equitable or legal
title in the right-of-way. A right-of-way occupancy permit is only the
nonexclusive, limited right to occupy right-of-way in the city for the limited
purposes and for the limited period stated in the right-of-way occupancy permit
and in accordance with this chapter.  The rights to occupy the right-of-way may
not be subdivided or subleased; provided, however, that two or more permittees
may collocate facilities in the same area of the right-of-way so long as each
such person complies with the provisions of this chapter. Collocating
permittees may file a joint application for a construction permit. A right-of-
way occupancy permit does not excuse a permittee from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its facilities on
facilities of others, including the city's facilities. A right-of-way occupancy
permit does not excuse a permittee from complying with any provisions of the
Code or other applicable law.
   (c)   The Director may impose such lawful conditions on the granting of a
permit as reasonably required to be consistent with the criteria set forth in
this section and to promote the policy of the city set forth in §
1054.02(d).
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.06  OBLIGATIONS OF PERMITTEES; CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in the
regulations each permittee, except for residential purposes, shall:
      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other permittees and the
city for the best, most efficient, and least obtrusive use of rights-of-way,
consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic and other disruptions,
including street cuts;
      (2)   Have a copy of the permit and associated plans on the job site at
all times;
      (3)   Participate in such joint planning, construction, and advance
notification of right-of-way work, excepting such work performed in an
emergency, provided the permittee uses its best efforts to contact the city at
the earliest possible time after beginning any such emergency work requiring
excavation or other interference with the flow of traffic, as may be required
by this chapter and as may be more specifically set forth in regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and provided further, that mandatory
joint planning shall not require the exchange or provision of trade secrets or
competitively sensitive materials or information;
      (4)   Reasonably cooperate with other permittees in the utilization of,
construction in, and occupancy of private rights-of-way within the city, but
only to the extent the same is consistent with the grant thereof, is not
additionally burdensome to any property owner or unreasonably burdensome to the
permittee;
      (5)   Upon reasonable written notice of not less than 60 days, except in
an emergency threatening the public health, safety or welfare, and at the
direction of the Director, and at the permittee's sole cost, to the extent
permitted by Ohio law, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as necessary, as
further specified in the regulations: (i) during any construction, repair, or
modification of any street, sidewalk, city utility, or other public
improvement; (ii) as part of the Director's determination, to the extent
permitted by Ohio law, that designated portions of its rights-of-way should
accommodate only underground facilities or that facilities should occupy only
one side of a street or other public way, provided that such determination is
reasonable and a part of an overall improvement plan or project; (iii) if an
additional or subsequent city or other public use of rights-of-way is
inconsistent with the then-current uses of such permittee; or (iv) for any
other reasonable cause as determined by the Director; however, nothing in this
division shall be interpreted as foreclosing any rights that any permittee has
pursuant to R.C. Title 49 to file an application with the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio under any applicable provision of R.C. Title 49, in order to
recover the costs associated with the relocation of any facilities pursuant to
this division;
      (6)   Provide information relating to a permittee's facilities and
operations within the rights-of-way in such form as to allow for the accurate
assessment of the quantity of a utility's infrastructure in the public rights-
of-way; for a right-of-way work permit, permittee shall provide a detailed
plan, as delineated in this chapter, of the proposed work. Upon a proper
request by a permittee demonstrating that any portion of the information
required constitutes a "trade secret" pursuant to Ohio law, or that the
material should remain confidential pursuant to any other provision of local,
state, or federal law, the material shall be treated as confidential and not
subject to public disclosure. In no event will the city allow any person
involved with the city's telecommunications service access to information a
permittee has designated "confidential" or "proprietary";
      (7)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance, or removal of
structures and facilities within the rights-of-way, including tree trimming, in
accordance with good engineering and construction practice including any
appropriate safety codes and in accordance with the regulations and use its
best efforts to repair and replace any street, curb or other portion of the
rights-of-way within the disturbed area of the work area, or facilities or
structure located therein, to a condition to be determined by the Director to
be adequate under current standards, on file with the City Engineer, and not
less than materially equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do
so in a manner which minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the city and
other permittees, all in accordance with the regulations adopted hereunder.
Each occupant of the right-of-way that may make a street cut shall file with
the city standards for repair of street cuts that shall be approved or denied
by the City Engineer within 60 days after filing. If the street cut standards
are denied the right-of-way, the occupant must amend its proposed standards to
meet the city's requirements prior to making any street cuts. Each right-of-way
applicant shall amend its street cut standards from time to time as required by
good engineering practice. If a street cut repair fails, the right-of-way
occupant responsible for the street cut shall repair the street cut until such
time as the city repaves the streets. No right-of-way occupant shall be
responsible to repair a street cut damaged by a cause other than the repair
made by the right-of-way occupant;
      (8)   Register, or cause to be registered, its facilities with
underground reporting services as set forth in the regulations;
      (9)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with the city in any emergencies
involving the rights-of-way in such manner as the regulations shall require,
including the maintenance of a 24-hour emergency contact;
      (10)   Field identify, using distinct identification, all structures and
facilities in areas of the rights-of-way designated for construction or related
activities in accordance with the regulations, provided that the regulations
shall require that the field identifications utilize, to the greatest extent
possible, customary industry standards for such identification; and
      (11)   Designate a single point of contact for all purposes hereunder, as
well as comply with such other contact and notice protocols as the regulations
require.
   (b)   Each permittee shall assure that any subcontractor or other person
performing any work or service in the rights-of-way on behalf of said permittee
will comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and its right-of-way
permit and will identify the permittee for whom such contractor is working.
Said permittee shall be responsible and liable hereunder for all actions of any
such subcontractor or others, as if said permittee had performed or failed to
perform any such obligation.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.07  PERMIT FEES AND AUDITING.
   (a)   Any cable television provider that has a valid franchise to operate a
cable television system within the city shall not be liable for any additional
right-of-way occupancy permit fees over and above any cable television
franchise fees specified in its cable television franchise for uses of rights-
of-way directly related to the uses for which such cable television provider
holds a cable franchise, so long as the amount of such fees due in each quarter
is equal to or greater than the amounts otherwise due the city pursuant to
division (b) of this section. If the amount due under division (b) of this
section is more than said cable franchise fees, then the cable television
provider shall receive a credit in each quarter against such amount for all
such fees paid in such quarter, and shall pay the balance to the city as set
forth in division (b) of this section.
      (1)   In addition to any fees charged pursuant to this chapter, all
general right-of-way occupancy permittees shall pay an annual fee of $200.00.
Every permittee shall pay to the city general occupancy right-of-way fees by
March 1st of every year.
      (2)   All right-of-way related fees collected through this chapter shall
be deposited in the electric fund to be utilized for the offset of municipal
costs associated with the management and control of the public right-of-way.
   (b)   All fees pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by check, money order,
or wire transfer to the City of Shelby, Ohio.
   (c)   Each general right-of-way occupancy permittee shall maintain books,
records, maps, documents, and other evidence directly pertinent to its
calculation of payments to the city. The Director, the Director of Finance and
Public Record, or either's designated agents shall have reasonable access to
any books, records, maps, documents, and other evidence for inspection,
copying, and audit relative to the quantity of infrastructure in the public
right-of-way to the extent necessary to assure that the payments hereunder are
accurate and that all right-of-way occupancy permittees fully comply with the
provisions of this chapter and their respective right-of-way permits. Upon a
proper request by a permittee demonstrating that any portion of the information
required constitutes a trade secret pursuant to R.C. §§ 133.61 through 133.69,
or shall remain confidential pursuant to any local, state, or federal law or
regulation, the material shall be treated as confidential and not subject to
public disclosure.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.08  MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.
   (a)   This section establishes terms and conditions for the use of the
public right-of-way for wireless service providers' micro wireless facilities
through the attachment to wireless support structures as established in city's
standards or R.C. Chapter 4939, which is incorporated herein by reference as if
fully set forth.
   (b)   Under the provisions of this section, a micro wireless facility
operator may establish, under certain specified conditions as set forth in
city's standards, consistent with R.C. Chapter 4939, wireless service through a
small cell facility and related wireless facilities. The city will review those
requests following the criteria and schedule set forth in R.C. Chapter 4939.
   (c)   Additionally, the city will also review any request to attach any
micro wireless facilities to a municipal electric utility pole, and shall grant
such requests only if the attachment to a municipal electric utility pole
serves the public health, welfare, and safety. The city shall deny all requests
to attach micro wireless facilities to municipal electric utility poles if such
attachment would not serve to further the public health and welfare, would
create a safety problem, or would interfere with the conduct of any municipal
operation.
   (d)   Where not in direct conflict with R.C. Chapter 4939, the application
procedure, permit fees, and auditing procedures outlined in this chapter shall
be applicable to applications to establish micro wireless facilities. Each
individual micro wireless facility will require a separate right-of-way
occupancy permit.
   (e)   Any request for a right-of-way occupancy permit for a micro wireless
facility will comply with the city's design guidelines as set forth in this
chapter and meet the requirements for design or concealment measures in a
Historic District.
   (f)   No micro wireless facility may be placed above ground in the right-of-
way in the city's designated undergrounding area.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.09  JOINT PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION.
   In order to promote the purposes of this chapter and the policy set forth
herein, the Mayor shall adopt regulations requiring and governing joint
planning and construction for all right-of-way occupancy permittees. Such
regulations shall not, however, require a permittee to divulge trade secrets or
other competitively sensitive confidential information, release of which would
cause material injury to the permittee. Such regulations shall also require any
confidential information of a permittee in the possession of the city be
treated as such, to the extent such information does not legally constitute a
public record.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.10  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (a)   Construction permit requirement.  Except as otherwise provided in the
Code, no person may construct in any right-of-way without first having obtained
a construction permit as set forth below. This requirement shall be in addition
to any requirement set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   A construction permit allows the permittee to construct in that
part of the right-of- way described in such construction permit and to obstruct
travel over the specified portion of the right- of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
      (2)   A construction permit is valid only for the dates and the area of
rights-of-way specified in the construction permit.
      (3)   No permittee may construct in the right-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the construction permit unless such permittee:
         A.   Submits a supplementary application for another construction
permit before the expiration of the initial construction permit; and
         B.   Is granted a new construction permit or construction permit
extension.
      (4)   Original construction permits issued pursuant to this section
shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by inspectors and authorized
city personnel. If the original construction permit involves work conducted
simultaneously at multiple locations, each location shall display a photocopy
of the original construction permit. If the original construction permit is not
conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site, then upon request, the
original construction permit must be produced within 12 hours or the first
earliest business hour, whichever is later. For purposes of this section,
business hour shall mean the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. during a
business day.
   (b)   Construction permit applications.
      (1)   Application for a construction permit shall be made to the
Director.
      (2)   All construction permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
         A.   Credible evidence that the applicant (where required) has been
issued a right- of-way occupancy permit or proof that the applicant has written
authority to apply for a construction permit on behalf of a party that has been
issued a right-of- way occupancy permit;
         B.   Submission of a completed construction permit application in the
form required by the Director, including, but not limited to, all required
attachments and dated drawings showing the location and area of the proposed
project, number and location of street cuts, and the location of all then known
existing and proposed facilities of the applicant or permittee within the
proposed project area. All drawings, plans and specifications submitted with
the application shall comply with applicable technical codes, rules and
regulations and be certified as to being in such compliance by trained
technical personnel acceptable to the Director. The mapping data is only
required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to
reasonably determine the location of the permittee's facilities in the right-
of- way. The city reserves the right, in circumstances that the Director
considers unique, complex, or unusual, to request that certain submitted
drawings, plans, and specifications be accompanied by the certification of a
registered licensed professional engineer;
         C.   A city approved traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the OMUTCD, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
         D.   If the applicant wants to install new facilities, if specifically
requested by the Director, evidence that there is no surplus space and evidence
that the applicant has received an appropriate permit and is adhering to the
city's Rules and Regulations; and
         E.    If applicant is proposing an above ground installation on
existing poles within the right-of-way, the applicant shall provide credible
information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify:
            1.   The size and height of the existing poles;
            2.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles and if
specifically requested by the Director, the excess capacity currently available
on such poles before installation of applicant's facilities; and
            3.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles and if
specifically requested by the Director, the excess capacity for like or similar
facilities that will exist on such poles after installation of applicant's
facilities.
         F.   If the applicant proposes to install new poles within the right-
of-way, the applicant shall provide:
            1.   Credible evidence, if specifically requested by the Director,
satisfactory to the city that there is no excess capacity on existing poles or
in existing underground systems;
            2.   Credible evidence to the city that it is not financially and/
or technically practicable for the applicant to make an underground
installation or locate its facilities on existing poles;
            3.   The location, size, height, color, and material of the
proposed poles; and
            4.   Credible evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant
will adhere to all the applicable laws concerning the installation of new
poles.
         G.   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the right-of-way, the applicant shall provide credible
information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify:
            1.   Based on the existing facilities, the excess capacity for like
or similar facilities currently available in such ducts or conduits before
installation of applicant's facilities; and
            2.   Based on existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or
similar facilities that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation
of applicant's facilities.
         H.   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the right-of- way, the applicant
must provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently
detail and identify:
            1.   The location, depth, size, and quantity of proposed new ducts
or conduits; and
            2.   The excess capacity for like or similar equipment that will
exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's facilities.
         I.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date; and
         J.   Payment of all money due to the city for:
            1.   Permit fees;
            2.   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city as a result
of applicant's prior construction in the right-of-way or any emergency actions
taken by the city;
            3.   Any right-of- way occupancy permit issued to the applicant/
person whose facilities are being constructed; and
            4.   Any other money due to the city from the applicant/person
whose facilities are being constructed.
         K.   In addition to the above requirements, applicant must comply with
all applicable construction guidelines.
         L.   When a construction permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional facilities or any part of a facility, the posting of a
construction bond and removal bond, acceptable to the city and subject to this
chapter, for the additional facilities or any part of a facility is required.
         M.   Upon request, the Director may modify or waive the information
requirements if they are not necessary in evaluating the construction permit
application. The Director may request applicable and pertinent additional
information if it is necessary in evaluating the construction permit
application.
   (c)   Issuance of permit; conditions. If the city determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter and the construction
permit process, the Director shall issue a construction permit subject to the
provisions of this division. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the construction permit and the performance of the permittee
thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to
insure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property
and safety of other users of the right-of- way, and to minimize the disruption
and inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (d)   Joint applications. Applicants are encouraged to submit joint
applications for construction permits to work in the right-of-way at the same
place and time. Joint applicants shall have the ability to divide among
themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable
construction permit fees.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.11  CONSTRUCTION, RELOCATION, AND RESTORATION.
   (a)   Utility engineering study required.
      (1)   Prior to commencement of any initial construction, extension, or
relocation of facilities in the right-of-way, except for repair, maintenance,
or replacement with like facilities or relocations requested or caused by a
third party (excluding the city) or another permittee, a permittee shall
conduct a utility engineering study on the proposed route of construction
expansion or relocation unless the Director issues a written exception. Where
such construction and/or relocation is requested or caused by a third party,
every permittee located within the right-of-way at issue or involved with the
work shall use all best efforts to cooperate and assist any other permittee or
person who is directed by the city to perform the required utility engineering
study. A utility engineering study consists of, at minimum, completion of the
following tasks:
         A.   Secure all available "as-built" plans, plats, and other location
data indicating the existence and approximate location of all facilities along
the proposed construction route.
         B.   Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any
facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not limited
to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts, and visible street cut
repairs.
         C.   Determine and record the presence and precise location of all
underground facilities the applicant or person on whose behalf the permit was
applied for owns or controls in the right- of-way along the proposed route.
Upon request of the Director, a permittee shall also record and identify the
general location of all other facilities in the right-of- way along the
proposed route. For the purposes of this section, general location shall mean
the alignment of other facilities in the right-of-way, but shall not
necessarily mean the depth of other facilities in the right-of-way.
         D.   Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the
tasks described in division (a)(1)A. through C. of this section, on the
construction permittee's proposed route maps and construction plans.
         E.   Where the proposed location of facilities and the location of
existing underground facilities appear to conflict on the plans drafted in
accordance with division (a)(1)D. of this section, permittee has the option of
either utilizing non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at
the critical points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the
horizontal, vertical, and spatial position, composition, size, and other
specifications of the conflicting underground facilities, or re-designing the
construction plans to eliminate the apparent conflict. Unless waived by the
Director, a permittee shall not excavate more than a three feet by three feet
square hole in the right-of-way to complete this task.
         F.   Based on all of the data collected upon completion of the tasks
described in this section, adjust the proposed design to avoid the need to
relocate other underground facilities.
      (2)   The Director may modify the scope of the utility engineering study
as necessary depending on the proposed construction plans.
   (b)   Copy to city. Upon completion of the tasks described in division (a)
of this section, the construction permittee shall submit, if necessary labeled
in accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1020.06(B), the proposed route
maps and construction plans, with the results of the utility engineering study,
in the most advanced format (including, but not limited to electronic and/or
digital format) then currently being used by the permittee that the city is
capable of reading (or readily converting to a readable form). The mapping data
is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to
reasonably determine the location of the permittee's facilities in the right-
of-way. The
permittee shall supply the mapping data on paper if the Director determines
that the format currently being used by the permittee is not capable of being
read by the city.
   (c)   Qualified firm. All utility engineering studies conducted pursuant to
this section shall be performed by the permittee if in the discretion of the
Director the construction permittee is qualified to complete the project
itself. Alternatively utility engineering studies shall be performed by a firm
specializing in utility engineering that is approved by the city.
   (d)   Cost of study. The permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with
division (a) through (c) of this section.
   (e)   Construction schedule. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter
or in the Rules and Regulations, or unless the Director waives any of the
requirements of this section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a
permittee shall be required to submit a written construction schedule to the
city five working days before commencing any work in or about the right-of-way,
and shall further notify the city not less than one working day in advance of
any excavation in the right-of-way. This section shall apply to all situations
with the exception of circumstances under §
1054.13(d)(1) (Emergency Situations) and §
1054.12 (Minor Maintenance) herein.
   (f)   Location of facilities.
      (1)   The placement of new facilities and replacement of old facilities,
either above ground or underground, shall be completed in conformity with
applicable laws and the city's Rules and Regulations.
      (2)   The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of
new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if the right-of-way is
full, or if the area is designated solely for undergrounding in accordance with
R.C. § 4939.0314.  In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public health,
safety, and welfare; the condition of the right-of-way; the time of year with
respect to essential utilities; the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way; future city and county plans for public improvements; development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest and
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral treatment among permittees.
   (g)   Least disruptive technology. All construction or maintenance of
facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least amount of
damage and disruption of the right-of-way. Specifically, every permittee when
performing underground construction, if technically and/or technologically
feasible and not economically unreasonable, shall utilize trenchless
technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling, directional
boring, and microtunneling. In addition, all cable, wire, or fiber optic cable
installed in the subsurface right-of-way pursuant to this chapter may be
required to be installed in conduit, and, if so required, no cable, wire, or
fiber optic cable may be installed pursuant to this chapter using "direct bury"
techniques.
   (h)   Special exceptions. The city may grant a special exception to the
requirements of division (f) and (g) of this section if a permittee, upon
application, demonstrates with written evidence that:
      (1)   The exception will not create any threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare;
      (2)   Permittee demonstrates that the increased economic burden and the
potential adverse impact on the permittee's construction schedule resulting
from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively inhibits
the ability of the permittee to provide services in the city;
      (3)   The permittee demonstrates that the requirement unreasonably
discriminates against the permittee in favor of another person;
      (4)   The requirements requested by the city herein create an
unreasonable economic burden for the permittee that outweighs any potential
benefit to the city.
   (i)   Relocation of facilities.
      (1)   A permittee shall as promptly as reasonably possible and at its own
expense, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way
whenever the city finds it necessary to request such removal and relocation. In
instances where the city requests removal and/or relocation, the city shall
waive all applicable construction permit fees. Upon removal and/or relocation,
the permittee shall restore the right-of-way to the same or better condition it
was in prior to said removal or relocation. If existing poles are required to
be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles will be replaced with
poles of the same or similar size. In accordance with law, the Director may
request relocation and/or removal in order to prevent unreasonable interference
by the permittee's facilities with:
         A.   A public improvement undertaken or approved by the city;
         B.   The public health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to
prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over
the right-of-way; or
         C.   The sale, conveyance, vacation, or narrowing of all or any part
of a right-of- way.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee who has facilities in
the right- of-way subject to a vacation or narrowing that is not required for
the purposes of the city, shall have a permanent easement in such vacated
portion or excess portion in conformity with R.C. § 723.041.
      (3)   If, in the reasonable judgment of the city, a permittee fails to
commence removal and/or relocation of its facilities as designated by the city,
within 30 days after the city's removal order, or if a permittee fails to
substantially complete such removal, including all associated repair of the
right- of-way of the city, within 12 months thereafter, then, to the extent not
inconsistent with applicable law, the city shall have the right to:
         A.   Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities
belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to,
the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all
right, title and interest in the facilities to another person for operation;
         B.   Authorize removal of the facilities installed by the permittee
in, on, over, or under the right-of-way of the city at permittee's cost and
expense, by another person; however, the city shall have no liability for any
damage caused by such action and the permittee shall be liable to the city for
all reasonable costs incurred by the city in such action; and
         C.   To the extent consistent with applicable law, any portion of the
permittee's facilities in, on, over, or under the right- of-way of the city
designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by the permittee
shall belong to and become the property of the city without payment to the
permittee, and the permittee shall execute and deliver such documents, as the
city shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to evidence
such ownership by the city.
   (j)   Pre-excavation facilities location. Before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each permittee who has facilities located in the area
to be excavated shall, to the best of its ability, mark the horizontal and
approximate vertical placement of all its facilities. All permittees shall also
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to
establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for
excavation.
   (k)   Right-of-way restoration.
      (1)   The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the
right-of-way as required herein, weather permitting, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of
the work, and the surrounding areas, including trench backfill, paving and its
foundations in accordance with the Code and Rules and Regulations. If a
permittee is unable to timely complete the restoration of right-of- way due to
unreasonable inclement weather conditions, the permittee shall complete the
restoration of the right-of-way as soon as weather conditions make it possible
to do so and upon said completion notify the city.
      (2)   In approving an application for a construction permit, the city may
choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or alternatively
to restore the right-of-way itself if the permittee has in the past not abided
by requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   If the city allows a permittee to restore the right-of-way, the
permittee may at the time of application for a construction permit be required
to post a construction bond in an amount determined by the city to be
sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its approximate
pre-excavation condition. If, 12 months after completion of the restoration of
the right-of-way, the city determines that the right-of-way has been properly
restored, the surety on the construction bond shall be released.
      (4)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and
with the materials specified by the city. The city shall have the authority to
prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration and may do so in written
procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The city in
exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards and
considerations: the number, size, depth, and duration of the excavations,
disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way; the traffic volume carried by the
right-of-way; the character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
the pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining life expectancy
of the right-of-way affected by the excavation; whether the relative cost of
the method of restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the
prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-
way; and the likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise
take place. Methods of restoration may include, but are not limited to,
patching the affected area, replacing of the right-of-way base at the affected
area, and in the most severe cases, milling, overlay, and/or street
reconstruction of the entire area of the right-of-way affected by the work.
      (5)   By restoring the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its
work and shall maintain it for 12 months following its completion. During this
12 month period, it shall, upon notification from the Director, correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the
Director. Weather permitting, said work shall be completed within five calendar
days of the receipt of the notice from the Director, unless otherwise extended
by the Director.
      (6)   If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the city or fails to satisfactorily and timely
complete all repairs required by the city, the city, at its option, may do such
work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of
billing, the restoration cost of restoring the right-of- way and any other
costs incurred by the city. Upon failure to pay, the city may call upon any
bond or letter of credit posted by permittee and/or pursue any and all legal
and equitable remedies.
      (7)   If the work to be done under the permit is being done at the same
location and the same period of time as work by the city and/or another
permittee(s), then the Director may reasonably apportion the restoration
responsibility among the city, permittees, and/or other persons.
   (l)   Damage to other facilities.
      (1)   Each permittee shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
city-owned facilities in the right-of-way which the permittee or its facilities
damage.
      (2)   In the case of an emergency, and if possible after reasonable
efforts to contact the permittee seeking a timely response, when the city
performs work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary, as may be allowed by
law, to maintain, support, or move a permittee's facilities to protect those
facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that permittee and
shall be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Upon failure to pay, the
city may pursue all legal and equitable remedies in the event a permittee does
not pay or the city may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted by the
permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies. Each permittee
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of
another permittee caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned
by that permittee's facilities.
   (m)   Right-of-way vacation. If the city sells or otherwise transfers a
right-of-way which contains the facilities of a permittee, such sale or
transfer shall be subject to any existing easements of record and any easements
required pursuant to R.C. § 723.041.
   (n)   Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, restoration,
and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be performed in
conformance with all applicable laws, Rules and Regulations, other standards as
may be promulgated by the Director.
   (o)   Inspection. When the construction under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the Director.
      (1)   The permittee shall make the construction site available to the
inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   At the time of inspection, the inspector may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public; violates any law; or violates the terms and
conditions of the permit and/or this chapter.
      (3)   The inspector may issue an order to the permittee for any work
which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be
cause for revocation of the permit. The order may be served on the permittee by
regular U.S. Mail. An order may be appealed to the Director. The decision of
the Director may be appealed to the Mayor whose decision shall be final. If not
appealed, within ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall
present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected. If such
proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director may revoke
the permit pursuant to §
1054.13(e).
   (p)   Other obligations.
      (1)   Obtaining a construction permit does not relieve permittee of its
duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay
all fees required by any other laws.
      (2)   Permittee shall comply with all requirements of all laws, including
the Ohio Utility Protection Service.
      (3)   Permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
laws and standards, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work.
      (4)   No right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except
in the case of an emergency as outlined in §
1054.13(d)(1).
      (5)   Permittee shall not obstruct a right-of-way so that the natural
free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. The Director may waive this requirement if it is technically
or economically unreasonable in the circumstances.
      (6)   Private vehicles other than necessary construction vehicles may not
be parked within or adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of
trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized
by the permit.
   (q)   Undergrounding required. Where not otherwise required to be placed
underground by this chapter and in accordance with R.C. § 4939.0314(G) to the
extent it is in effect a permittee shall locate facilities underground at the
request of an adjacent property owner, provided that such placement of
facilities underground is consistent with the permittee's normal construction
and operating standards and that the additional costs of such undergrounding
over the normal aerial or above ground placement costs of identical facilities
are paid directly by the property owner making the request. A permittee, under
any circumstance shall, upon the reasonable request of the city, always use
best efforts to place facilities underground. Where technically possible and
not economically unreasonable or unsafe (based upon the technology employed and
facilities installed), all facilities to be installed by a permittee under the
right-of-way shall be installed in conduit.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.12  MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT.
   (a)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit requirement. No person shall
perform minor maintenance of facilities in the right-of-way without first
having obtained a right-of-way minor maintenance permit as set forth in this
chapter. Minor maintenance means: (i) the routine repair or replacement of
facilities with like facilities not involving construction and not requiring
traffic control for more than two hours at any one location; (ii) the routine
repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving
construction and taking place on thoroughfares and arteries between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; (iii) the routine repair or replacement of
facilities with like facilities not involving construction on all right-of-
ways, other than thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede traffic, and
is for a period of less than eight contiguous hours; (iv) construction other
than on thoroughfares and arterials that takes less than eight contiguous hours
to complete, does not impede traffic, and does not involve a pavement cut; (v)
minor and/or non-material vegetation management/tree pruning. The Director may
adopt Rules and Regulations pursuant to §
1054.18 that clarify the definition of minor maintenance and/or provide a
process for a permittee to determine whether particular activity constitutes
minor maintenance.
      (1)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit allows the right-of-way
minor maintenance permittee to perform all minor maintenance in any part of the
right-of-way as required.
      (2)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit is valid from the date of
issuance until revoked by the Director.
      (3)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit must be displayed or upon
request produced within 12 business hours.
      (4)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit by itself shall under no
circumstances provide a permittee with the ability to cut pavement without
seeking additional authority from the Director.
   (b)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permits are not required for the
routine maintenance of wireless facilities, or the replacement of wireless
facilities with wireless facilities that are consistent with the City's current
design guidelines, and are either substantially similar to the existing
wireless facilities or the same size or smaller than the existing wireless
facilities.
   (c)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit applications. Application for a
right-of-way minor maintenance permit shall be made to the Director. In
addition to any information required by the Director, all right-of-way minor
maintenance permit applications shall contain, and will only be considered
complete upon compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Credible evidence that the applicant has obtained a right-of-way
occupancy permit or proof that the applicant has written authority to apply for
a right-of-way minor maintenance permit on behalf of a party that has been
issued a right-of- way occupancy permit.
      (2)   Submission of a completed right-of-way minor maintenance permit
application in the form required by the Director.
      (3)   A statement that the applicant will employ protective measures and
devices that, consistent with the OMUTCD, will prevent injury or damage to
persons or property and to minimize disruptions to the efficient movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Issuance of right-of-way minor maintenance permits; conditions.
      (1)   If the Director determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter and the right-of-way minor maintenance permit
process, the Director shall issue a right-of-way minor maintenance permit
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The city may impose reasonable conditions, in addition to the Rules
and Regulations enacted by the Director, upon the issuance of the right-of-way
minor maintenance permit and the performance of the right-of-way minor
maintenance permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, to insure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect
the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the
disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (e)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit fees. The Director shall not
charge a fee for the issuance of the right-of-way minor maintenance permit but
may revoke the right-of-way minor maintenance permit as any other permit may be
revoked under this chapter.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.13  ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION.
   (a)   Mandatory denial of permit. Except in the case of an emergency, no
permit will be granted:
      (1)   To any person who has not yet made an application;
      (2)   To any person who has outstanding debt owed to the city unless
payment in full has been placed in an escrow account approved by the City
Finance Director and the Law Director;
      (3)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of
a permit; or
      (4)   If, in the discretion of the Director, the issuance of a permit for
the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The Director, in
exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of
ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations
relating to the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (b)   Permissive denial of permit. The Director may deny a permit in order
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to prevent interference with
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users.
      (1)   The Director, in his/her discretion, may consider one or more of
the following factors:
         A.   The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought
is available;
         B.   The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-
way;
         C.   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in
another right- of-way for the proposed facilities;
         D.   The applicability of this chapter or other regulations of the
right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way;
         E.   The degree of compliance of the permittee with the terms and
conditions of its right-of-way occupancy permit, this chapter, and other
applicable ordinances and regulations;
         F.   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and
businesses that will result from the use of that part of the right-of- way;
         G.   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when
it is scheduled for total or partial re-construction;
         H.   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage
to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by
the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way; or,
         I.   Whether such applicant or its agent(s) have failed within the
past three years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with, the
requirements of this chapter or, if applicable, any other law.
      (2)   Under no circumstances will open cutting take place on a newly
constructed street within 24 months after construction completion or a newly
reconstructed street within 24 months of reconstruction completion, except
where:
         A.   An emergency situation requires that an open cut is necessary;
         B.   Vital services to resident(s) or business(es) are needed or have
been cut off and there is no reasonable alternative (such as jacking or boring)
in supplying or restoring such services; or
         C.   The Director determines it is in the best interests of the city
that such an open cut take place.
   (c)   Discretionary issuance of permit.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of
this section, the Director may issue a permit in any case where the permit is
necessary;
         A.   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant, if established by credible evidence satisfactory to the city;
         B.   To allow such customer to materially improve its service; or
         C.   To allow a new economic development project to be granted a
permit under this section.
      (2)   To be granted a permit under this section, the permit applicant
must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of
service, or the development project when it was required to submit its list of
next year projects.
   (d)   Work done without a permit in emergency situations.
      (1)   Each permittee shall, as soon as is practicable, immediately notify
the Director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an
emergency. The permittee may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in
order to respond to the emergency. Within five business days, unless otherwise
extended by the Director, after the occurrence or discovery of the emergency
(whichever is later), the permittee shall apply for the necessary permits, pay
the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for any and all
actions taken in response to the emergency. In the event that the city becomes
aware of an emergency regarding a permittee's facilities, the city shall use
best efforts to contact the permittee or the representative of each permittee
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency,
the cost of which shall be borne by the permittee whose facilities caused the
emergency.
      (2)   Except in the case of an emergency, any permittee who constructs
in, on, above, within, over, below, or through a right-of-way without a valid
permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said
permit, pay double all the other fees required by the Code, deposit with the
city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply
with all of the requirements of this chapter.
   (e)   Revocation of permits.
      (1)   Permittees hold permits issued pursuant to the Code as a privilege
and not as a right. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke
any permit, without refunding any fees, in the event of a substantial breach of
the terms and conditions of any law, or any provision or condition of the
permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be
limited to, any of the following:
         A.   The violation of any provision or condition of the permit;
         B.   An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or condition of the
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon
the city or its citizens;
         C.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
permit;
         D.   The failure to maintain the required construction or removal
bonds and/or insurance;
         E.   The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when required, a right-of-
way occupancy permit;
         F.   The failure to complete the construction in a timely manner; or
         G.   The failure to correct a condition of an order issued pursuant to
§
1054.11(o)(3).
      (2)   If the Director determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any law or any condition of the
permit, the Director shall serve a written demand upon the permittee to remedy
such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause
for revocation of the permit. Upon a substantial breach, as stated above, the
Director may place additional or revised conditions on the permit.
      (3)   By the close of the second business day following receipt of
notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the Director with a plan,
acceptable to the Director, for its correction. permittee's failure to so
contact the Director, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
      (4)   If a permittee commits a second substantial default as outlined
above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and the permittee will
not be allowed further permits for up to and including one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
      (5)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such
revocation.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.14  CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL BONDS.
   (a)   Construction bond.  Prior to the commencement of any construction, a
construction permittee, shall deposit with the Director an irrevocable,
unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in an amount determined by
the Director to be appropriate based upon fair and reasonable criteria. Unless
a construction default, problem or deficiency involves an emergency or
endangers the safety of the general public, the Director shall serve written
notice to the construction permittee detailing the construction default,
problem, or deficiency. If the Director determines that correction or repair of
the construction default, problem, or deficiency has not occurred or has not
been substantially initiated within ten calendar days after the date following
service and notification and detailing the construction default, problem, or
deficiency, then the city may attach the letter of credit or surety bond. Upon
attachment, written notice shall be served on the construction permittee by the
Director.
   (b)   Removal bond.  Upon issuance of a right-of-way occupancy permit and
continuously thereafter, and until 120 days after a permittee's facilities have
been removed from the right-of-way, (unless the Director notifies the permittee
that a reasonably longer period shall apply), a permittee shall deposit with
the Director and maintain an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or
surety bond in an amount equal to or greater than $100,000; the Director shall
make all reasonable efforts to allow permittee a period of five calendar days
after serving notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem
or deficiency prior to the Director attachment of the letter of credit or
surety bond regarding the removal of facilities. Upon attachment, written
notice shall be provided to the permittee by the Director.
   (c)   Blanket bond. In lieu of the construction bond required by division
(a) of this section and the removal bond required by division (b) of this
section, permittee may deposit with the Director of Public Works an
irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in the amount of
$5,000,000. Unless a construction default, problem, or deficiency involves an
emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the Director shall
make all reasonable effort to allow permittee a period of five calendar days
after sending notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem
or deficiency prior to Director attachment of the letter of credit or surety
bond.
   (d)   Self bonding. In lieu of the construction bond required by division
(a) of this section, the removal bond required by division (b) of this section
and the blanket bond required by division (c) of this section, those permittees
maintaining a book value in excess of $50,000,000 may submit a statement to the
Director requesting to self-bond. If approval to self-bond is granted, a
permittee shall assure the city that such self-bonding shall provide the city
with no less protection and security than would have been afforded to the city
by a third party surety providing permittee with the types and amounts of bonds
detailed in the above named sections. This statement shall include:
      (1)   Audited financial statements for the previous year;
      (2)   A description of the applicant's self-bonding program; and,
      (3)   Other applicable and pertinent information as reasonably requested
by the Director.
   (e)   Purposes. The bonds required by this section, and any self-bonding to
the extent it has been permitted, shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all terms, conditions,
and obligations of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee or permittee's violation of this chapter or its failure to comply
with all rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city
issued pursuant to this chapter;
      (3)   The payment of all compensation due to the city, including permit
fees;
      (4)   The payment of premiums (if any) for the liability insurance
required pursuant to this chapter;
      (5)   The removal of facilities from the right-of-way pursuant to this
chapter;
      (6)   The payment to the city of any amounts for which the permittee is
liable that are not paid by its insurance or other surety; and,
      (7)   The payment of any other amounts which become due to the city
pursuant to this chapter or the law.
   (f)   Form. The bond documents required by this section and any replacement
bond documents shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the
surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by the surety
until ninety (90) days after completion of Construction of the Facilities and,
notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed by
the surety until at least ninety (90) days' written notice to city of surety's
intention to cancel or not renew this bond."
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.15  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Construction and major maintenance plan. Each permittee shall, at the
time of initial application and by January 1st of each following year, file a
construction and major maintenance plan with the Director. Such construction
and major maintenance plan shall be provided for all geographical areas
requested by the Director, up to and including the entire geographical area of
the city. It shall be submitted using a format(s) mutually agreeable to the
permittee and the city and shall contain the information determined by the
Director to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of construction in the right- of-way. The construction and major
maintenance plan shall include, but not be limited to all currently scheduled
and/or anticipated construction projects for the next calendar year, and if
none are scheduled or anticipated then the plan shall so state. The permittee
shall use its best efforts in supplying this information and shall update the
construction and major maintenance plan on file with the Director whenever
there is a material change in scheduled and/or anticipated construction
projects. In an effort to assist permittees with the completion of their annual
construction and major maintenance plan, the Director, on or before October 1st
of each year, will send each permittee's representative a descriptive narrative
(and any mapping information reasonably available) for all the planned right-
of-way improvements and/or scheduled maintenance that the city then currently
intends to undertake during the next calendar year. The city may, in its sole
discretion, update and/or modify the descriptive narrative and mapping
information provided.
   (b)   Mapping data. With the filing of its application for a right-of-way
occupancy permit, a permittee shall be required to accurately inform the city
of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the
permittee then currently occupies and begin submitting to the city all
information that currently exists and which can be provided regarding the
location of its facilities in the right-of-way in hard copy or in the most
advanced format (including, but not limited to, electronic and/or digital
format) then currently being used by the permittee that the city is capable of
reading or readily converting to a readable form. Unless otherwise required by
§
1054.10(b), a permittee shall have up to one year from the date of the
permittee's initial filing of an application for a right-of-way occupancy
permit to completely submit all the mapping data in the entire geographical
area of the city which it owns or over which it has control that are located in
any right-of- way of the city. The mapping data is only required to be at the
"Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the
location of the permittee's facilities in the right-of-way. Any time after the
issuance of a right-of-way occupancy permit, and upon the reasonable request of
the Director of Public Service, a permittee shall be required to provide to the
city any additional location information for any facilities which it owns or
over which it has control that are located in any right-of-way of the city
required by the city. Any and all actual direct, incidental, and indirect costs
incurred by the city during the process of reviewing, inputting, and/or
converting a permittee's mapping information to comport with the city's then
current standard format (whether electronic or otherwise) shall be directly
billed to and must be timely remitted by the permittee. Failure to pay such
mapping costs within 60 days of receipt of an invoice shall subject an
applicant or permittee to revocation of its right-of-way occupancy permit and
the penalties of §
1054.99. Further, each permittee that has been issued a right-of-way occupancy
permit shall accurately inform the city on or before each subsequent January
1st of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of- way
the permittee's then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1st. The
Director may, in the future, adopt additional specifications and further define
or modify the mapping data requirements under this section for reasons
including, but not limited to, changes in technology or the law regarding
public disclosure of a permittee's mapping information. When the city modifies
and/or amends the mapping data requirements, the city shall use best efforts to
avoid unreasonably increasing the burden to the permittees that may be
associated with satisfying the amended mapping requirements. When the mapping
requirements of division (b) of this section are amended, each permittee shall
be served with a copy of the new specifications or modifications by regular
U.S. Mail to the representative identified in each right-of-way occupancy
permit; provided, however, that any failure of any permittee to actually
receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or enforceability
of said specifications or modifications.
   (c)   Exemption from disclosure. In the event that the city receives a
request from a third party for the disclosure of information a provider has
clearly marked as confidential/proprietary information, the city shall respond
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 149. However, the city will endeavor to notify
the permittee of any such request prior to making the subject document(s)
available for inspection or copying, at which point it will be the permittee's
sole and exclusive responsibility to take whatever steps it deems necessary to
protect such documents from disclosure.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.16  COMPENSATION.
   (a)   As compensation for the city's costs to administer this chapter,
manage, administer and control the right-of-way and maintain each right-of- way
occupancy permit issued, every permittee shall pay to the city an annual
registration maintenance fee of $200.00 each calendar year.
   (b)   Timing.  Registration maintenance fees shall be paid each calendar
year in accordance with division (a) of this section.  Registration maintenance
fees shall be paid in full by March 31 of each calendar year. No pro ration
shall be given for any use less than one year.
   (c)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by any taxing authority or community authority on the use of city
property as a result of a permittee's use or occupation of the right-of-way,
the permittee shall be responsible for payment of such taxes or assessments.
Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter and shall not be considered an offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and
charges listed in this chapter. The  registration maintenance fee is not in
lieu of any tax, fee, or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this chapter, or as required by applicable law.
   (d)   Interest on late payments. In the event that any registration
maintenance fee is not paid to the city by May 1st, the permittee shall pay a
monthly late charge of 1% of the unpaid balance for each month or any portion
thereof for which payment is not made.
   (e)   No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the city of any
registration maintenance fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
registration maintenance fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the
city may have for additional sums payable.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.17  CITY USE OF FACILITIES.
   Except for traffic control facilities and facilities in place as of the
effective date of this chapter, facilities that are the subject of other
agreements between the city and a permittee, or as otherwise provided by law,
the city shall not install or maintain upon any poles and within any
underground pipes or conduits or other facilities of any general right-of-way
occupancy permittee, any facilities desired by the city for the city's use
without the consent of such permittee unless: (i) such installation and
maintenance is lawful and consistent with good engineering and construction
practice and all appropriate safety codes; (ii) such installation and
maintenance does not unreasonably and materially interfere with existing and
future operations of the permittee; (iii) such installation and maintenance is
not unduly burdensome to such permittee; (iv) the city enters into an agreement
with the permittee which specifies other appropriate and reasonable terms and
conditions, including compensation based upon the city's proportionate cost of
the right-of-way, and including compensation governing the use of permittee's
facilities; and (v) the city's use is non-discriminatory. Each permittee shall
cooperate with the city in the development of a facility use agreement for such
city facilities. Each permittee shall cooperate with the city in planning and
designing its facilities so as to accommodate the city's reasonably disclosed
requirements in this regard. Copies of all agreements hereunder shall be filed
with the Mayor.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.18  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   (a)   In accordance with the provisions of division (c) of this section, the
Director may promulgate regulations, as the Director deems appropriate from
time to time, to carry out the express purposes and intent of this chapter.
   (b)   Such regulations shall not materially increase the obligations of any
permittee hereunder. In promulgating such regulations, including those related
to §
1054.06, the Director shall, among other appropriate factors, consider the
costs of permittee compliance as an important factor in determining the
appropriateness of the regulations.
   (c)   The Director shall promulgate proposed regulations by forwarding
legislation for City Council's consideration. Each general right-of- way
occupancy permittee shall be served with a copy of the proposed regulations by
certified U.S. Mail; provided, however, that any failure of any permittee to
actually receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or
enforceability of such regulation. Any person, including any permittee, may
file specific written comments or objections on the proposed regulations. The
proposed regulations shall become effective 30 days after adoption by City
Council, unless such regulation is modified or rejected by City Council.
   (d)   The City Council may adopt emergency regulations to be immediately
effective, when the City Council determines the same to be appropriate for the
public health, safety, or welfare of the city.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.19  INDEMNITY; INSURANCE.
   (a)   Except for right-of-way permittees for residential purposes, each
permittee shall, as a condition of its right-of-way permit, indemnify, protect
and hold harmless the city and its agents, officers, elected officials,
employees, volunteers, and subcontractors from and against all damages, costs,
losses, or expenses:
      (1)   For the repair, replacement, or restoration of city property,
equipment, materials, structures, and facilities which are damaged, destroyed,
or found to be defective as a result of such permittee's acts or omissions;
      (2)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of
action, and judgments:
         A.   For damage to or loss of the property of any person, and/or the
death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's compensation, loss of
services, or loss of income or wages to any person;
         B.   Arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act
or omissions of such permittee, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors,
in the performance of activities pursuant to such right-of-way occupancy
permit, no matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur; and
      (3)   The requirement to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless shall not
extend to the negligence of the city or its agents, elected officials,
officers, employees, volunteers, and subcontractors, to the extent that the
existence of such negligence shall be proven to exist.
   (b)   Except for right-of-way occupancy permittees for residential purposes,
each permittee, as a condition of its permit, shall keep in force a policy or
policies of liability insurance, having such terms and in such amounts as
follows:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability,
bodily injury, and property damage must be maintained. Coverage must be written
on an occurrence basis, with the following minimum limits of liability and
provisions, or their equivalent:
         A.   Bodily injury:
            1.   Each occurrence - $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate - $3,000,000
         B.   Property damage:
            1.   Each occurrence - $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate - $3,000,000
         C.   Personal injury:
            1.   Annual aggregate - $3,000,000
         D.   Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained
for six months after the termination of a right-of-way occupancy permit.
         E.   Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for
the following hazards: E - explosion, C - collapse, U - underground.
      (2)   Comprehensive auto liability insurance: Comprehensive auto
liability insurance to cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles must be
maintained. Applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability insurance as
part of applicant's comprehensive general liability insurance however; said
insurance is subject to approval by the Director. Coverage must be written on
an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability and provisions, or
their equivalent:
         A.   Bodily injury:
            1.   Each occurrence - $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate - $3,000,000
         B.   Property damage:
            1.   Each occurrence - $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate - $3,000,000
      (3)   Additional insurance: The city reserves the right to require any
other insurance coverage it deems necessary after review of any proposal
submitted by applicant.
      (4)   Self-insurance: Those applicants maintaining a book value in excess
of $50,000,000 may submit a statement requesting to self-insure. If approval to
self-insure is granted, applicant shall assure the city that such self-
insurance shall provide the city with no less than would have been afforded to
the city by a third party insurer providing applicant with the types and
amounts of coverage detailed in this section. This statement shall include:
         A.   Audited financial statements for the previous year;
         B.   A description of the applicant's self-insurance program;
         C.   A listing of any and all actions against or claims made against
applicant for amounts over $1,000,000 or proof of available excess umbrella
liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts above
$50,000,000; and,
         D.   The Director may modify or waive these requirements if they are
not necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. The
Director may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is
necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance.
   (c)   The permittee shall also provide documentation they maintain standard
workers' compensation coverage as required by law. Similarly, permittee shall
require any subcontractor to provide workers' compensation coverage in amounts
required by law for all of the subcontractor's employees.
   (d)   The city's examination of or failure to request or demand, any
evidence of insurance in accordance with this chapter shall not constitute a
waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of any insurance
shall not limit applicant's obligations under this chapter.
   (e)   If the permittee is a corporation, upon request of the city, permittee
shall provide a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal
equivalent) as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State (or legal
equivalent) in the state or country in which incorporated.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.20  DISCONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS, ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES.
   (a)   Except for right-of-way occupancy permittees for residential purposes,
when the permit so allows, any right-of-way occupancy permittee that intends to
discontinue or is discontinuing its operations of any facilities within the
rights-of-way shall first:
      (1)   Submit a written notice to the Director, describing the portion of
the facilities to be discontinued and abandoned, any plan for securing the same
and the proposed date of abandonment, which date shall not be less than 60 days
from the date such notice is submitted to the Director or provide information
satisfactory to the Director that the right- of-way occupancy permittees'
obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this section and any
other sections in the chapter have been lawfully assumed by another right-of-
way occupancy permittee;
      (2)   Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities in a manner that
promotes the city's goals of providing innovative and economic solutions to
efficiently and economically utilize limited right-of way capacity. Such
proposal must be approved or denied by the Director. The Director's denial of a
proposal to re-use its facilities shall be made in writing and describe the
reasons for such a denial. The denial may be appealed by the right-of-way
occupancy permittee to the Mayor. The decision of the Mayor shall be final;
      (3)   Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities in place
indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of solution.
The Director must approve or deny said proposal. The Director's denial of a
proposal to abandon facilities in place shall be done in writing and describe
the reasons for such a denial. The denial may be appealed by the right-of-way
occupancy permittee to the Mayor. The decision of the Mayor shall be final;
      (4)   Completely remove all specifically identified portion(s) of its
facilities in a manner acceptable to the city within a reasonable amount of
time if the city believes that there exists a reasonable justification for such
removal; or
      (5)   Submit to the city within a reasonable amount of time and in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21, a proposal for transferring
ownership of its facilities to the city. If a right-of-way occupancy permittee
proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option where lawful: (i)
purchase the facilities; or, (ii) unless a valid removal bond has already been
posted, require the right-of-way occupancy permittee to post a bond in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred in removing the facilities.
   (b)   Facilities of a right-of-way occupancy permittee who fail to comply
with this section and which remain unused facilities shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Abating the nuisance;
      (2)   Taking possession of the facilities and restoring them to a useable
condition subject to a finding of the PUCO pursuant to the requirements of R.C.
§§ 4905.20 and 4905.21; or
      (3)   Requiring removal of the facilities by the right-of-way occupancy
permittee or by the right-of-way occupancy permittee's surety.
   (c)   If the city requires a right-of-way occupancy permittee to remove
unused facilities in any right-of-way, the city shall use reasonable efforts to
direct that this removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavations
of the right-of-way. If the city abates the nuisance, it may take all action
necessary to recover its costs and to abate said nuisance, including, but not
limited to, those methods set forth in R.C. § 715.261. The city shall have no
liability for any damage caused by such action, and the permittee shall be
liable to the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in such
action.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.21  REVOCATION.
   (a)   In addition to any other rights set out in this chapter, the city
reserves the right to revoke, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
division (b) of this section, any right-of-way occupancy permit in the event
such permittee violates any material provision of this chapter, its right-of-
way occupancy permit, or this chapter.
   (b)   The Director shall give a permittee 30 days prior written notice of an
intent to revoke said permittee's right-of-way occupancy permit. Such notice
shall state the reasons for such action. If the permittee corrects the
violation or other cause within the 30-day notice period, or if the permittee
initiates efforts satisfactory to the Director to remedy the stated violation,
the Director may rescind said notice of revocation. If the permittee does not
correct the stated violation or other cause or undertake efforts satisfactory
to the Director to remedy the stated violation, the Director may recommend said
permit be revoked. After granting the permittee an opportunity to be heard in
person or in writing, the City Council may revoke the right-of-way occupancy
permit. Unless otherwise required by law, the decision of the City Council
shall be final.
   (c)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Director or required by law, if a
right-of-way occupancy permit is revoked, all facilities located in the rights-
of-way or located upon public property pursuant to such permit shall be removed
and/or abandoned at the sole expense of the permittee subject to applicable
law, including but not limited to R.C. §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.22  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed so as to grant any right
or interest in any right-of-way or public property other than that explicitly
set forth herein or in a permit.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from
constructing, maintaining, repairing, or relocating any non-proprietary city
utility, including street lighting, telecommunications, or like facilities;
grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating, or altering any street,
public property, or right-of-way; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or
repairing any sidewalk or other public work or improvement. To the extent that
such work requires temporary or permanent relocation or rearrangement of any
facilities or structures of any permittee, such relocating or rearrangement
shall be accomplished at the sole cost of the permittee in such time and in
such manner as set forth in the regulations.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.23  TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   In the event it is necessary to move or remove temporarily any of the
permittee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to this
chapter, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other
structure over the streets of the city, upon two weeks written notice by the
Director to the permittee, the permittee shall, at the expense of the person
requesting the temporary removal of such facilities, comply with the Director's
request; provided that the permittee's expense has been reasonably secured by
the person so requesting.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.24  ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; RENEWAL.
   (a)   A right-of-way occupancy permit shall not be assigned or transferred,
either in whole or in part, other than to an affiliate, without the prior
written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Any assignment or transfer of right-of-way occupancy permit, including an
assignment or transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change, requires the
written approval of the city. For purposes of this section, fundamental
corporate change means the sale or transfer of a controlling interest in the
stock of a corporation or the sale or transfer of all or a majority of a
corporation's assets, merger (including a parent and its subsidiary
corporation), consolidation, or creation of a subsidiary corporation. For the
purposes of this section, fundamental partnership change means the sale or
transfer of all or a majority of a partnership's assets, change of a general
partner in a limited partnership, change from a limited to a general
partnership, incorporation of a partnership, or change in the control of a
partnership.
   (b)   The parties to the assignment or transfer of right-of-way occupancy
permit shall make a written request to the city for its consent in the form of
the right-of-way occupancy permit application. The city shall reply in writing
within 60 days of actual receipt of the request and shall indicate its approval
of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary. city
may conduct a public hearing on the request within 30 days of such
determination if it determines that a sale or transfer of the right-of-way
occupancy permit adversely affects the city.
   (c)   Notice of a hearing shall be given 14 days prior to the hearing by
publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city. The notice shall contain the date, time, and place of the hearing and
shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by city.
   (d)   The city will review the qualifications (including, but not limited to
legal, technical, and financial where appropriate) of the proposed assignee or
transferee and terms of the existing right-of-way occupancy permit. City will
make its decision in writing setting forth any conditions for assignment or
transfer. Within 120 days of actual receipt of the request for assignment or
transfer, the city shall approve or deny such assignment or transfer request in
writing.
   (e)   In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be
ultimately acceptable to the city without transferee or assignee requesting and
being issued a replacement right-of- way occupancy permit within 90 days of
transfer or assignment.
   (f)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such consent or approval
shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any person controlling,
controlled by or under the same common control of the original holder of the
right-of-way occupancy permit.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.25  FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP.
   Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the
Bankruptcy Act by or against the permittee, or any action for foreclosure or
other judicial sale of the permittee's facilities located within the right-of-
way, the permittee shall promptly notify the Director of such fact.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.26  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   No person shall use the right-of-way to operate any facility that has
not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter
and been issued a right-of-way occupancy permit.
   (b)   No person shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above,
within, over, below, under, or through the right-of-way, unless allowed under
this chapter or having been issued a right-of- way occupancy permit.
   (c)   Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and
a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (d)   No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate
offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (e)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be as
provided in §
1054.99.
   (f)   The permittee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of its right-of-way occupancy permit or this chapter by
reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.27  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Non-exclusive remedy. The remedies provided in this chapter are not
exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at law
or in equity. The city is hereby authorized at any time to seek legal and
equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the public right-of-way,
including damages to the right-of-way, whether caused by a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the Codified Ordinance of
the City of Shelby.
   (b)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a
regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a
final, non-appealable order that any permit, right or any portions of this
chapter are illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit or right granted or
deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a
mutual right of either party to terminate without cause upon giving 60 days
written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a
revocable permit shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in
the permit, right, or registration, respectively, except for conditions
relating to the term of the permit and the right of termination. If a permit or
right shall be considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the permittee
must acknowledge the authority of the city to issue such revocable permit and
the power to revoke it.
   (c)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by the granting
of a permit or by issuing a right-of-way occupancy permit pursuant to this
chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the
lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the
city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, and the State of
Ohio, and under the Charter of the city to regulate the use of the right-of-
way. The permittee by its acceptance of a permit or permittee by applying for
and being issued a right-of-way occupancy permit is deemed to acknowledge that
all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise
as now are or the same as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the
city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by
the city at any time. A permittee is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are
subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is
deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.
   (d)   Method of service.  Any notice or order of the Director or Mayor shall
be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to the last
known fax number of the person to be served;
      (3)   Left at the usual place of business of the person to whom it is to
be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or older;
      (4)   Sent by certified, pre-posted U.S. mail to the last known address;
      (5)   If the notice is attempted to be served by certified, pre-posted
U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not delivered or the
certified letter is not returned within 14 days after the date of mailing, then
notice may be sent by regular, pre-posted, first-class U.S.; or
      (6)   If the notice is attempted to be served by regular, first class
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned showing that the
letter was not delivered or is not returned within 14 days after the date of
mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure, building, premises, or property affected by such notice.
   (e)   Applies to all permittees. This chapter shall apply to all permittees
and all permittees unless expressly exempted.
   (f)   Police powers. All persons' rights are subject to the police powers of
the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public. All persons shall comply with all applicable laws
enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all persons
shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the
placement and specifications of facilities.
   (g)   Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
   (h)   Force majeure. In the event any person's performance of any of the
terms, conditions, or obligations required by this chapter is prevented by a
cause or event not within such person's control, such inability to perform
shall be deemed excused, and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a
result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within
the control of a permittee shall include, without limitation, acts of God,
strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of, explosions,
acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides, and fires.
   (i)   No warranty. The city makes no representation or warranty regarding
its right to authorize the construction of facilities on any particular rights-
of-way. The burden and responsibility for making such determination shall be
upon the person installing facilities in the rights-of- way.
   (j)   Captions. The captions and headings in this chapter are for
convenience and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the
meaning or interpretation of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 1054.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter and the
remedy of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the following penalties shall apply.
      (1)   For failure to comply with any other provision of this chapter, the
penalty shall be a civil forfeiture, payable to the city, in an amount up to
$500.00 per day for each day of violation. In addition, for failure to timely
comply with a notice by the Director to remove or rearrange facilities pursuant
to §
1054.06, an additional civil forfeiture equal to any costs incurred by the city
as a result of such failure, including but not limited to any penalties or
liquidated damages charged the city by its contractors occasioned thereby,
shall be imposed.
      (2)   A 5% late fee, accrued monthly, shall be assessed to all delinquent
right-of- way occupancy permit fees. Delinquent permit fees may result in the
denial of future right-of-way work permits.
   (b)   Any permittee may be excused for violations of this chapter and its
right-of-way permit due to force majeure.
(Ord. 14-2018, passed 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 1056: INTERNET SERVICES
Section
   
1056.01   Internet services
   
1056.02   Definitions
   
1056.03   Rates and charges for service
   
1056.04   Service and physical property
   
1056.05   Billing
   
1056.06   General provisions
   
1056.99   Penalty
§ 1056.01  INTERNET SERVICES.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to make available
internet service provided to residential and commercial customers within the
City of Shelby and customers outside of the City of Shelby. Such internet
services shall be provided subject to the conditions and charges set forth in
this chapter.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service may recommend the modification or
amendment of the rates and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "City." The City of Shelby, Ohio.
   (b)   "Commercial customer." Any customer that is not a "residential
customer."
   (c)   "Council." The Council of the City of Shelby.
   (d)   "Customer." An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity receiving internet service under the terms of this chapter at one
structure and/or one location, subject to these rules and regulations.
   (e)   "Landlord/customer." The owner of any structure and/or location where
a customer is taking service, if the owner is different from the end user of
service and the owner is responsible for payment of the communications bill for
the structure and/or location.
   (f)   "Month." One billing cycle, approximately 30 days apart.
   (g)   "Residential customer." A customer who uses service for individual
single-family home or farm use, including apartments, mobile homes and other
individual single-family dwelling units or living quarters or apartment units.
A non-profit entity operating for a public benefit or a for-profit business
shall not constitute a "residential customer".
   (h)   "Utility." The Division of Electricity and Communications of the city.
   (i)   "Communication service(s)". Any and all forms of communication which
are transferred electronically, and to include, but not necessarily limited to
telecom, internet, cable, satellite, and managed services of
telecommunications, entertainment and media, and internet/web services.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.03  RATES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   Service schedules.
      (1)   Schedule A. Residential Internet
         A.   Availability of service. Available for residential customers
within or outside the city.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
SpeedRate (symmetrical speeds)
5 MBps   $5.00
10 MBps  $10.00
25 MBps  $22.50
50 MBps  $40.00
100 MBps $70.00
250 MBps $150.00
 
         C.   Riders for equipment charges, taxes, and other costs related to
service. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the applicable
equipment charges, applicable taxes, installation costs, and other costs
related to service. These costs will be recovered through riders on customers'
bills. Riders can be adjusted by the utility as necessary to recover costs.
         D.   Terms of payment. The amount billed is due on the fifteenth day
of the month for the following month's service.
      (2)   Schedule B. Commercial internet.
         A.   Availability of service. Available for commercial customers,
including landlord/customers, within or outside the city.
         B.   Rates for service.
 
SpeedRate (symmetrical speeds)
25 MBps  $40.00
50 MBps  $65.00
100 MBps $100.00
250 MBps $250.00
500 MBps $500.00
1 GBps   $1,000.00
 
         C.   Riders for equipment charges, taxes, and other costs related to
service. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the applicable
equipment charges, applicable taxes, installation costs, and other costs
related to service. These costs will be recovered through riders on customers'
bills. Riders can be adjusted by the utility as necessary to recover costs.
         D.   Terms of payment. The amount billed is due on the fifteenth day
of the month for the following month's service.
      (3)   Schedule C. Beta internet service rates.
         A.   Availability of service. Beta internet service may be provided to
certain customers for a trial period for new services or services expanded to
new areas. The Director of Public Service, in his/her sole discretion, shall
determine if customers qualify for beta internet service rates. The Director of
Public Service shall consider whether the internet services to be provided are
being tested when determining if a customer qualifies for beta internet
service. Beta internet service may be available for residential and commercial
customers within or outside the city as specified by the utility.
         B.   Rates for service. Fifty percent of the applicable rates under
Schedules A and B for the period of one year.
         C.   Riders for equipment charges, taxes, and other costs related to
service. Customers under this schedule shall be subject to the applicable
equipment charges, applicable taxes, installation costs, and other costs
related to service. These costs will be recovered through riders on customers'
bills. Riders can be adjusted by the utility as necessary to recover costs.
         D.   Terms of payment. The amount billed is due on the fifteenth day
of the month for the following month's service.
   (b)   Economic development incentive rate for commercial internet.
      (1)   Applicable to commercial customers. To encourage economic
development within the city, the Director of Public Service can approve
economic development rates for certain qualifying commercial customers. To
qualify, a new or existing customer shall meet the following criteria:
         A.   New commercial customers shall employ at least two full time
equivalent ("FTE") employees. Existing commercial customers shall employ at
least two additional FTE employees. An FTE employee is defined as a person who
works an average of at least 35 hours per week over a period of one year.
      (2)   No customer shall be entitled to an economic development incentive
rate for more than five cumulative years. For purposes of this provision, a
year is defined as 12 consecutive months of receiving service at the economic
development incentive rate.
      (3)   The five year economic development incentive rate shall be as
follows:
         A.   Year 1-5 - wholesale internet pricing. (As defined as the amount
the city pays for bandwidth but not less than $0.30/MBps).
         B.   Year 6 and forward - the current retail rate being charged under
the rate schedule applies to the customer.
      (4)   Termination of economic development incentive rate. The Director of
Public Service or his or her designee shall have the right to terminate a
customer's economic development incentive rate at any time if it is determined
that the economic development incentive rate is no longer accomplishing the
goal of economic development or the customer no longer satisfies the criteria
set forth in division (b)(1)A. of this section.
      (5)   Annual review of each economic development incentive rate. The
Director of Public Service or his or her designee shall review each economic
development incentive rate customer annually. Each customer shall cooperate
fully in said review. The economic development incentive rate may be increased
by the utility if wholesale prices increase.
      (6)   Qualification for the economic development incentive rate. The
Director of Public Service or his or her designee shall determine if a new or
existing customer qualifies for the economic development incentive rate based
on the criteria set forth in division (b)(1)A. of this section, subject to
Council approval.
   (c)   Miscellaneous charges (applicable to all customers).
      (1)   Equipment charges. Customers shall be charged the following amounts
for the first 12 months of cumulative service.
         A.   Residential: $10.
         B.   Commercial: $15.
      (2)   Late payment charge. If a bill payment is not received by the
utility offices or by the utility's authorized agent on or before the specified
payment date (the fifteenth of the month), a one-time, additional amount of 5%
of the amount of the bill will become due and payable as part of the customer's
total obligation. If the fifteenth of the month falls on a Sunday or holiday
where there is no postal service, the payment shall be due on the following
business day. If payment has not been received prior to the service month, the
service will be terminated.
      (3)   Dishonored check charge. Whenever a customer pays a bill by check
and the check is returned to the utility by the customer's financial
institution for lack of sufficient funds in the customer's account, the
customer will be assessed a dishonored check charge of $25.00 for each check
returned.
      (4)   Application fee. An application fee of $5.00 shall be assessed to
customers at the time of application for service.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.04  SERVICE AND PHYSICAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Service boundary. The utility may supply all communication service(s)
within the corporate limits of the city. Subject to Article XVIII of the Ohio
Constitution and the City Charter, the utility may extend service to customers
outside the corporate limits of the city.
   (b)   Application for service.
      (1)   A copy of the schedules and standard terms and conditions under
which service is rendered to customers will be furnished upon request at the
utility office. The utility, in its sole discretion, shall determine which
schedule is applicable to serve customers. Once an application for service is
approved, service will be commenced and a copy of the service agreement will be
furnished to the customer upon request. If a customer desires delivery of
telecommunications service at more than one point, a separate agreement shall
be required for each separate point of delivery. Service delivered at each
point of delivery shall be billed separately under the applicable schedule.
      (2)   The customer (or landlord/customer), after making proper
application for service, shall notify the utility when the customer desires
service to be established. Service shall be turned on, upon the date specified,
by an authorized agent of the utility if beginning service on such date is
possible and practicable for the utility.
      (3)   When landlord/customer files an application for service on the
behalf of tenant(s), the tenant(s) name(s) shall be included on the
application.
   (c)   Service not transferrable. No person may commence use of service until
after making application for service and a service agreement is provided to the
person in accordance with division (b)(2) of this section. Any successor in
interest to a customer, including, without limitation, heirs, executors,
administrators, assignees, trustees, guardians, receivers and conservators,
shall be deemed to be a person who must make application for service; provided
that any successor in interest whose rights arise from death or incompetence of
the customer shall have 30 days in which to make application.
   (d)   Customer indebted to utility. Service will not be supplied to any
premises, if at the time of application for service, the applicant is indebted
to the utility for service previously supplied at the same time or other
premises, until payment of the indebtedness or other arrangement satisfactory
to the utility shall have been made. Unpaid balances of previously rendered
final bills shall be transferred and included on the initial or subsequent bill
for a like service account. Such transferred final bills, if unpaid, will be
part of the past due balance of the transferred account and subject to the
utility's collections and disconnection procedures. The transfer of final bills
is limited to like service, i.e., residential to residential, commercial to
commercial. The utility may not transfer a delinquent customer service account
to any account where any end user is a residential service customer.
   (e)   Continuity of service.
      (1)   The utility will make all reasonable efforts to furnish necessary
and adequate service and facilities. The city or utility shall not be liable in
damages for failure to supply internet or for interruptions in service, and
shall be relieved of its obligation to serve and may discontinue or modify
service, if the failure or interruption is due to natural disasters or the
public enemy, military actions, wars, insurrections, riots, civil disturbances,
vandalism, strikes, fires, floods, washouts, explosions, acts or orders of any
civil, judicial or military authorities, and without limitation by the
foregoing accidents, contingencies or other causes beyond the control of the
utility or city.
      (2)   Without incurring any liability therefore, the utility may also
suspend service for such periods as may be reasonably necessary in order to
make repairs to or changes in its facilities or other property; provided that
the utility shall keep a record of any interruption of service affecting its
entire system, or a major division thereof, including a statement of time,
duration and cause of interruption. It will also notify customers affected by
the interruption in advance of the contemplated work, and approximately how
long the interruption will last by any means the utility or city deems
sufficient.
      (3)   Unless otherwise provided within this chapter, the utility shall
not discontinue service to any customer without giving the customer reasonable
notice. The notice shall be delivered either personally or telephonically when
possible and practical. In circumstances, however caused, when time does not
permit the giving of the notice in advance of a discontinuance of service or a
change in service caused by circumstances beyond the control of the utility,
reasonable notice shall be given whenever possible and practical to all
customers affected advising them that service is off and of the time at which
service is expected to be restored.
   (f)   Customer's liability. In the event of loss of or damage/injury to the
property of the utility due to actions or omissions of the customer or agents,
the cost of the necessary repairs or replacement thereof shall be paid to the
utility by the customer. No one except the agents of the utility shall be
allowed to make any internal or external adjustments to any equipment or other
piece of apparatus which shall be the property of the utility.
   (g)   No customer shall sell to another. Service furnished by the utility is
for the sole use of the customer and shall not be resold by the customer except
on written permission obtained from the utility. The renting of premises with
the cost of service included in the rental as an incidence will not be
considered a resale of the services.
   (h)   Reasonable access to premises. Neither the utility nor its agents or
employees shall enter into the interior of any structure on the premises of a
customer without the express permission of the customer except in cases of
emergency. Any agent or employee seeking entrance into or upon the premises of
a customer shall have and show symbols of identification. Any agent or employee
seeking entrance to the interior of any structure on the premises shall advise
the owner or occupant as to his or her purpose in doing so. Except in cases of
emergency, no customer shall be obligated to afford entrance or access to his
or her premises except during normal business hours and then only to those
parts of the premises as may be the location of utility-owned property.
   (i)   Right-of-way. The customer, without reimbursement, will make or
procure conveyance to the utility of right-of-way or right- of-entry and
installed lines satisfactory to the utility to permit the utility to cross
property between the utility's lines and the customer's property at the
location where service is to be furnished, including property owned or
controlled by the customer for the utility's distribution lines, extensions
thereof or appurtenances necessary or incidental to the supplying of service to
the customer.
   (j)   Network Access Policy Statement and Internet Acceptable Use Policy.
The Director of Public Service or his or her designee shall implement a Network
Access Policy Statement and Internet Acceptable Use Policy that shall be
provided to customers with the service agreement after the application for
service is accepted by the utility. A prospective customer must agree to abide
by the terms and conditions of the Network Access Policy Statement and Internet
Acceptable Use Policy before the utility will provide internet service to the
customer.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.05  BILLING.
   (a)   Billing periods. Bills will be rendered by the utility to the customer
on a monthly basis. Non-receipt of bills by customer does not release or
diminish the obligation of customer with respect to payment thereof. The
responsibility for payment of all internet services shall be with the
individual or entity whose name appears on the application for service as the
"customer".
   (b)   Billing adjustments. The utility may adjust then current or subsequent
bills to address billing errors or omissions from prior bills. There is no
limitation on the time when the utility may back bill for such billing errors
or omissions.
   (c)   Payment of bills. The customer shall pay bills at the utility office
during the regular office hours or to any of the utility's authorized
collecting agent during the regular office hours of the agent. Any remittance
received by mail at any office of the utility bearing U.S. Postal Office
cancellation date corresponding with or previous to the last date on which the
bill is payable "net" will be accepted as within the net payment period.
   (d)   Deposits.
      (1)   A deposit of $0.00 shall be for the following utility service when
combined with water, or sewer, and/or electric:
         A.   Internet service.
      (2)   A deposit of $50.00 shall be for the following utility service:
         A.   Internet service only.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(1) of this section, a deposit not
exceeding $300.00 for a combined utility service of electric, water, and sewer
for residential customers or 150% of an estimated average bill for commercial
customers (unless the service is temporary) may be required of the customer at
any time, or from time to time before or after service is commenced. Deposit
criteria will be affected by but not limited to:
         A.   Past general credit history;
         B.   Past payment history (with the utility);
         C.   End use of service; and
         D.   Duration of service.
      (4)   The utility office shall have a reasonable time in which to
ascertain that the obligations of the customer have been fully performed before
being required to return any deposit. The deposit shall be credited to the
customer's account when payments have been made by the due date on 12
consecutive months, unless the customer's account has been terminated. Where
the account has been terminated, any remaining deposit not used to credit the
account shall be directly reimbursed to the customer within 30 calendar days.
      (5)   There shall be no interest paid or accrued on deposits.
      (6)   Losses incurred by the utilities because of the insufficiency of
the utilities deposit to cover unpaid charges shall be distributed
proportionately among the four utilities of water, sewer, electricity, and
internet.
   (e)   Charges and payment for temporary service.
      (1)   In addition to regular payments for internet service, the customer
may pay the cost for all material, labor and other necessary expenses incurred
by the utility in supplying service to the customer at his or her request for
any temporary purpose to use (one year or less). The utility may, at its
option, require that any customer for temporaiy service deposit with the
utility a sum equal to the utility's estimate of the cost to be incurred by it
for temporary service.
      (2)   After the service has been discontinued and all actual costs
determined, any sum deposited by the customer in excess of the actual cost
shall be refunded to him. If the utility elects to leave in place any or all of
the facilities provided, constructed or installed to render such temporary
service, an amount of the customer's deposit shall be returned to the customer
such that the customer shall only be charged for the facilities not retained.
   (f)   Right to discontinue service.
      (1)   After giving notice as specified below, the utility shall have the
right to discontinue service for any of the following reasons or purposes:
         A.   Refusing reasonable access to the utility's facilities;
         B.   Non-payment of bills for service when bills are due;
         C.   Failure to furnish or maintain a required security deposit; and
         D.   Material violation of any of these rules and regulations not
otherwise covered in this provision.
      (2)   The utility shall have the right, without notice, to discontinue
service and disconnect and remove from the premises of a customer, the
equipment and any other properly belonging to the utility for any of the
following reasons or purposes:
         A.   Non-use of service;
         B.   Fraudulent representation or practice and theft of service; and
         C.   Whenever deemed necessary by the utility for safety reasons.
   (g)   Termination procedures.
      (1)   It is determined that a customer is delinquent in rendering payment
for service when the billing for service remains unpaid after five business
days from the due date. Whenever a customer is delinquent in providing payment
for service from the due date of the bill, the utility shall mail a delinquency
notice to the customer (and landlord/customer if applicable).
      (2)   The utility may, after proper and reasonable notice of pending
termination of service (not less than ten days), terminate the customer's
service during normal utility business hours in compliance with the following
conditions:
         A.   No delinquent bill disconnection may be made after 12:30 p.m. on
the day preceding a day that all services necessary for the customer to arrange
and the utility to perform a reconnection are not regularly performed.
         B.   Those utility employees who normally perform the termination of
service will be authorized to make available to the customer, means to avoid
disconnection. Such employees at the premises shall not be authorized to make
extended payment arrangements.
         C.   The notice of termination sent to the service address (and
billing address, if different) shall be in writing, and shall identify the
amount owed, the date which service may be terminated, and the reason for
termination.
      (3)   If a guarantor is required in order to reestablish service, the
guarantor must sign an acknowledgment or willingness to accept the
responsibility for payment of the customer's bill in case of the customer's
default.
   (h)   Change of address of customer. When a customer changes his or her
address, he or she shall give notice of his or her intent to do so to the
utility prior to the date of change. If the customer received internet service
at a premises at any time during a particular month, the customer is
responsible for service supplied for the entire month regardless of when he or
she changed his or her address.
   (i)   Change in tenancy or ownership. At such time as the utility is
notified of a change of tenancy or ownership, the utility shall prepare and
mail a final bill. If the former customer received internet service at a
premises at any time during a particular month, the former customer is
responsible for service supplied for the entire month regardless of when
tenancy or ownership ceased during the month.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Applicability. These rules and regulations are subject to, and
included as part thereof, all orders, rules and regulations applicable to the
utility from time to time issued or established by the City Council.
   (b)   Right to amend rules and regulations. The utility reserves the right
to make such further policies regulating internet service in order to carry out
the purposes of these rules and regulations as experience may suggest, and as
the utility may deem necessary or convenient in the conduct of its business.
   (c)   Shortage of supply. These rules and regulations shall not apply during
periods of shortage in the supply of internet bandwidth available to the
utility, to the extent that compliance by the utility with such rules and
regulations is precluded by the shortage in supply. During periods of shortage
of supply to the utility, restrictions on new service and curtailment of
existing service shall be governed strictly by the utility.
   (d)   Disputes. Disputes arising from the rules and regulations between
customers and the utility shall be resolved, to the best of its ability, by
utility personnel. Decisions or actions taken by utility personnel may be
appealed by the customer to the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1056.99  PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, whoever violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$150 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues unless otherwise provided by
law.
(Ord. 29-2019, passed 10-21-2019)
TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
      Chapter
         
1060.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
         
1062.   PARKS
         
1064.   CITY RESERVOIRS
         
1066.   MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
CHAPTER 1060:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
1060.01   Permit required for transporting certain wastes
   
1060.02   Placing garbage at street for collection; time limit
 
   
1060.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Disposing of dead animals and animal waste, see §
618.20
   Filthy accumulations, see §
660.04
   Garbage and rubbish in city reservoirs, see §
1064.07
   Littering, see §
660.03
   Loads dropping or leaking, see §
440.06
   Refuse in yards, see §
1490.14
   Shifting or loose loads, see §
440.10
   Trash and refuse haulers, see
Ch. 854
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, see R.C. §§ 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers, see R.C. § 3707.39
§ 1060.01  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRANSPORTING CERTAIN WASTES.
   (a)   No person shall remove, transport or convey any night soil, swill, the
contents of any privy vault or box, sink or cesspool or other filth or
offensive substances or liquids from, through or into the city without first
obtaining a permit to do so from the Health Commissioner, and unless the same
is in an airtight vessel that shall prevent the contents from emitting nauseous
vapors, odors or gases.
   (b)   No vehicle for the removal of such substances shall be allowed to
stand, except while loading, in any public street, alley, lane or public
grounds of the city and the substances shall not be deposited on any land or
buried within the city limits unless a permit is obtained for that purpose from
the Health Commissioner for that purpose.
(Ord. 35-84, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 1060.02  PLACING GARBAGE AT STREET FOR COLLECTION; TIME LIMIT.
   (a)   No person, owner or occupant of land in the city shall place, for a
period exceeding 24 hours, any trash, garbage, refuse or tree or shrub
trimmings upon any right-of-way of the city, or any part thereof, including any
tree lawn. The trash, garbage, refuse and tree or shrub trimmings shall be
placed in a closed and secured container. For the purpose of this section, a
“container” shall mean any device creating an enclosed space that can be used
to contain, store, or transport objects or materials and shall include bags
designed for trash and garbage.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, a 24-hour period shall commence upon
the placement of any article of trash, or garbage, refuse or tree or shrub
trimmings within the areas set forth in division (a) hereof.
   (c)   The culpability required for a violation of this section shall be one
of recklessness as defined in §
606.08 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Failure of the sanitation hauler to timely collect any trash, garbage,
refuse or tree or shrub trimmings shall not be a defense to a violation of this
section.
   (e)   No person (except law enforcement) without permission of said
resident, shall at any time go through or rummage through any person(s) trash,
refuse or garbage left at the curb for removal.
(Ord. 11-85, passed 6-17-1985; Ord. 29-2011, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 19-2014,
passed 11-17-2014)
§ 1060.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1062:  PARKS
Section
   
1062.01   Admittance to buildings and grounds
   
1062.02   Use of property; vandalism
   
1062.03   Firearms
   
1062.04   Interference with flowers, trees or wildlife
   
1062.05   Parking of vehicles
   
1062.06   Driving within grounds
   
1062.07   Speed limit in parks
   
1062.08   Minors' curfew
 
   
1062.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Appropriation of land, see Charter §§
107 et seq.
   Board of Park Commissioners, see
Ch. 278
   Parks and Transportation Plan, see Part 12, Title 4,
Appx. VI
   Parks in subdivisions, see §
1248.04
Statutory reference:
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools, see R.C. §§ 755.12 et seq.
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)(5)
§ 1062.01  ADMITTANCE TO BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   No person shall enter any public park buildings or enclosures except when
the buildings and enclosures are open to the public during the day or night,
and then only under regulations imposed by the Board of Park Commissioners
through its agents or employees.
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.02  USE OF PROPERTY; VANDALISM.
   No person shall use, move or carry away any public park property except
under regulations imposed by the Board of Park Commissioners or with the
permission of the Board through its agents or employees, nor shall any person
misuse, deface or destroy any public park property.
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.03  FIREARMS.
   No person shall carry or shoot any firearm or air gun within any public
park.
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.04  INTERFERENCE WITH FLOWERS, TREES OR WILDLIFE.
   No person shall remove any flower, shrub, tree or wildlife from any public
park, except with the permission of the Board of Park Commissioners, or damage
or destroy any flower, shrub, tree or wildlife in any public park. 
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.05  PARKING OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall park any vehicle at any time other than in parking spaces
designated from time to time by the Board of Park Commissioners, its agents or
employees.
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.06  DRIVING WITHIN GROUNDS.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in any public  park, except on established
roads or drives, unless permission is granted by the Board of Park
Commissioners, its agents or employees.
(Ord. 378, passed 8-19-1935)
§ 1062.07  SPEED LIMIT IN PARKS.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any drive or roadway in any park
at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. 19-2016, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 1062.08  MINORS' CURFEW.
   (a)   All city parks shall be closed at 9:30 p.m. each and every day of the
week, except to supervised groups. No minor under the age of 18 years shall
loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public parks of the city
between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to minors while in
supervised school, church, YMCA, scouting or other similarly supervised
activity or while on a direct route home to or from any of such supervised
activities or within 30 minutes of the closing thereof.
   (c)   No parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or
control of any minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly permit the minor
to violate this section.
(1986 Code, § 975.08(c))  (Ord. 32-61, passed 7-3-1961)
§ 1062.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $100 or shall be required to pay for or to otherwise make
good the damage, destruction or removal of any park property, or both.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1062.08(a) shall be dealt with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and
procedure.
   (c)   Whoever violates §
1062.08(c) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be
fined not more than $100. For a second or subsequent offense the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than
$250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(1986 Code, § 975.99)
CHAPTER 1064:  CITY RESERVOIRS
Section
   
1064.01   Liability of city
   
1064.02   Types of watercraft permitted on Shelby City Reservoir No. 3; hours
   
1064.03   Boating rules for Shelby City Reservoir No. 3
   
1064.04   Posting boating rules
   
1064.05   Hunting and trapping
   
1064.06   Property offenses
   
1064.07   Sanitation
   
1064.08   Traffic; animals
   
1064.09   Animals running at large
   
1064.10   Personal offenses
   
1064.11   Fishing in reservoirs permitted
   
1064.12   Stocking of reservoirs
   
1064.13   Fishing regulations
   
1064.14   Swimming
   
1064.15   Curfew and rules for Ball Field
   
1064.16   Enforcement
 
   
1064.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 618
   Hunting generally, see §
618.12
   Offenses relating to property, see
Ch. 642
   Operation of motor vehicles, see Chs.
432,
434
   Safety, sanitation and health, see
Ch. 660
Statutory reference:
   Watercraft and waterways, see R.C. Ch. 1547
   Watercraft certificates of title, see R.C. Ch. 1548
§ 1064.01  LIABILITY OF CITY.
   Persons using the city reservoirs and city lands and facilities adjacent and
contiguous thereto shall be considered "recreational users", as the term is
defined in R.C. § 1533.18(B), and as such, the persons shall assume
responsibility for any consequences of that recreational use. The city assumes
no liability whatsoever for the safety of boats, boat slips or moorings, the
operators or users thereof or passengers therein or thereon. The city assumes
no liability toward persons using city lands or facilities adjacent or
contiguous to the reservoirs.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.02  TYPES OF WATERCRAFT PERMITTED ON SHELBY CITY RESERVOIR NO. 3; HOURS.
   Rowboats, canoes, paddle boats, sailing craft and watercraft powered only by
electric motors and not exceeding four horsepower are permitted on Shelby
Reservoir No. 3 between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily, except at
such times as a red warning flag has been hoisted in the vicinity of the boat
launching area. Watercraft with a combination of an electric and gasoline
engine on board the vessel is permitted on the water but the use of the
gasoline engine is strictly prohibited. The gasoline engine's outdrive shall be
lifted out the water while any such vessel is within the reservoir.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 29-2013, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 1064.03  BOATING RULES FOR SHELBY CITY RESERVOIR NO. 3.
   Boating on Shelby City Reservoir No. 3 shall be governed and regulated as
follows:
   (a)   All boats shall be of the type authorized under the laws of the State
of Ohio and must be duly licensed pursuant to the laws of the state.
   (b)   All boats shall be operated pursuant to the operation and safety laws
and rules provided by the state.
   (c)   All boats must carry lights as provided by the laws of the state.
   (d)   No boats shall exceed a maximum speed of four miles per hour.
   (e)   All boats must be launched and removed at the places provided for
those purposes by the city.
   (f)   All boats must be removed from the Reservoir by 10:00 p.m. each day.
   (g)   None of the restrictions contained herein shall apply to city
employees while they are carrying out their official duties.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.04  POSTING BOATING RULES.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to post a
copy of §§
1064.02 and
1064.03 in a prominent place in the vicinity of the boat launching area at
Shelby City Reservoir No. 3 and is further directed to inspect such copies from
time to time to assure that they continue to be posted in a legible and
readable condition. 
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.05  HUNTING AND TRAPPING.
   (a)   No person shall hunt or discharge firearms on any city reservoir or on
any land or facilities adjacent or contiguous thereto.
   (b)   Trapping may be permitted if conditions warrant that animals are
causing harm to the dikes of the reservoir, provided that a person applies for
and receives and carries upon his or her person a written permit therefor from
the Director of Public Safety. The Director shall determine the number of
trappers permitted and shall also determine who will be issued a permit.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.06  PROPERTY OFFENSES.
   No person, while using or present on any of the reservoirs of the city and/
or city property adjacent thereto, shall do the following:
   (a)   Buildings and other property.
      (1)   Disfiguration. Willfully mark, deface, injure, tamper with,
displace or remove any building, table, dock, mooring stake, bench, landing,
fireplace railing, paving or paving material, water line or other public
utility or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether
temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, or
other structure, equipment, facility or city property or appurtenance, either
real or personal.
      (2)   Removal. Displace or remove any stone rip rap from the dikes on the
reservoir.
      (3)   Porta-pots. Fail to cooperate in maintaining porta-pots in a neat
and sanitary condition.
      (4)   Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any sand, whether
submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stone, tree, shrub or plant, down timber
or other wood or material, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting
or other means or agency.
      (5)   Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or
structure, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service
utility into, upon or across the land, except under authority of a special
written permit issued by the Superintendent of Water.
   (b)   Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
      (1)   Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant, or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or
plant, or attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant, or
dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
      (2)   Climbing trees. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon any
monument, vase, fountain, railing, fence or any other property not designated
or customarily used for such purposes.
      (3)   Hitching animals. Tie or hitch a dog or any other animal to any
tree or plant.
   (c)   Wild animals and birds.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap,
chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal or reptile, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (d)   Target shooting. Discharge any rifle, shotgun, handgun or any other
firearm.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.07  SANITATION.
   No person, while using or present on any of the reservoirs of the city and/
or city property adjacent thereto, shall:
   (a)   Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to
be placed in reservoir waters or in any waters on city-owned land adjacent
thereto flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the contamination, littering or pollution of
such waters, including but not limited to shavings, chips, straw, paper,
shells, cinders, glass, mud, food, dung, filth, cans, manure, rubbish, oil or
petroleum products, earth, gravel, brick, stone, metal, dirt, dye, detergent,
liquid, powdered or solid chemicals, or any other obnoxious substance.
   (b)   Refuse, garbage and trash. Bring, dump, deposit or leave any bottle,
broken glass, ash, paper, box, can, dirt, rubbish, garbage, waste, refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any reservoir waters or
left anywhere on adjacent city-owned lands, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where they are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
the rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the reservoirs and city-owned
lands adjacent thereto by the persons responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.08  TRAFFIC; ANIMALS.
   No person, while using or present on any of the reservoirs of the city and/
or city property adjacent thereto, shall:
   (a)   Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
exceeding ten miles per hour or a speed designated by the Superintendent of
Water by posted signs.
   (b)   Restricted areas. Drive any vehicle in any area other than an area
specifically designated by the Superintendent and indicated by posted signs, or
drive any vehicle in any restricted area, except those vehicles specifically
authorized by a permit signed by the Superintendent.
   (c)   Parking. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, except for the purpose of loading and unloading boats in
accordance with posted directions.
   (d)   Bicycles, motor-bikes and the like. Ride a bicycle, motorbike,
minibike or motorcycle in any area other than on black-topped roadways and
parking lots.
   (e)   All-terrain vehicles. Operate an all-terrain vehicle anywhere on
reservoir property or adjacent city-owned lands.
   (f)   Riding on reservoir embankments. Operate any vehicle on top of any
reservoir embankment or on the sides of any reservoir embankment, except duly
authorized city employees or contractors performing maintenance or mowing the
embankment.
   (g)   Domestic animals. Ride upon or permit to run loose upon reservoir
property any horse, pony or other domestic animals. 
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.09  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or having charge of any cat, dog, horse,
mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, chicken, duck, goose, turkey or any other animal
or fowl, whether domestic or wild, shall permit the same to run at large on
reservoir property or on the city-owned area surrounding any reservoir
property.
   (b)   The running at large of any such animal or fowl in or on any of the
premises mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running
at large in violation of this section.
   (c)   None of the aforementioned animals or fowl shall be considered to be
running at large within the meaning of this section if it is on a leash or
subject to some other equivalent restraint.
   (d)   The provisions of §
618.20 concerning animal waste shall be applicable to and enforced on the
premises of the city reservoirs and adjacent city-owned property.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.10  PERSONAL OFFENSES.
   No person, while using or present on any of the reservoirs of the city and/
or city property adjacent thereto, shall do the following:
   (a)   Intoxicating beverages.
      (1)   Prohibition. Possess or use any alcoholic beverage at any time; or
      (2)   Drunkenness. Enter or be on reservoir property or adjacent city-
owned land under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
   (b)   Fireworks and explosives. Bring or have in his or her possession, or
set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn, any firecracker,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks, explosive or inflammable material, or
discharge or throw the same into any such area from any land or highway
adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or
article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
   (c)   Domestic animals. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other
domestic animal into areas other than automobile parking lots, walks
immediately adjacent thereto or areas clearly marked by signs bearing the words
"Domestic Animals Permitted in this Area". Nothing herein shall be construed as
permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where the
animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes.
   (d)   Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or
loiter or remain in any pavilion or other structure or section thereof, which
may be reserved and designated for the use of the opposite sex. An exception
shall be made for children under five years of age.
   (e)   Dress. Willfully make an indecent exposure of his or her person so as
to offend or annoy another person.
   (f)   Alms. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
   (g)   Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by the Superintendent, hold a fire
on the banks of any reservoir, or drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigars or cigarettes, tobacco paper or other inflammable
material within any area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto.
   (h)   Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public" or use or
abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
   (i)   Games of chance. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
   (j)   Going onto ice. Venture onto the ice for any purpose, such as ice
fishing, ice boating or ice skating.
   (k)   Disorderly conduct. Violate any of the terms, conditions or
prohibitions of §
648.04 governing disorderly conduct.
   (l)   Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere with any person or
party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority
of a permit.
   (m)   Water skiing. Ski or ride on any device pulled behind a boat on
reservoir waters.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.11  FISHING IN RESERVOIRS PERMITTED.
   Subject to the rules, regulations and restrictions hereinafter provided, the
City Waterworks Reservoirs shall be open for public, controlled fishing.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.12  STOCKING OF RESERVOIRS.
   The Mayor, as Director of Public Service, is hereby authorized to enter into
a public fishing agreement with the State of Ohio Natural Resources Department,
and to have the agreement renewed whenever it is necessary, to provide for a
surplus crop of game fish for the City Waterworks Reservoirs for public
fishing.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.13  FISHING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall fish in the City Waterworks Reservoirs without first
obtaining a valid Ohio fishing license from the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, unless the person is exempt from the requirement of obtaining the
Ohio fishing license.
   (b)   No violation of any rule of the State Board of Health, and no
contamination of the water of the City Waterworks Reservoirs, will be
permitted.
   (c)   No fishing shall be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of the following day of any day, and all persons shall be subject to the
fishing laws of the State of Ohio and all orders of the Ohio Recreation and
Resources Commission enacted and issued from year to year.
   (d)   No firearms shall be allowed on any reservoir premises at any time.
   (e)   All fishing shall be done from the bank or from a watercraft, as
permitted by §
1064.02.
   (f)   No refuse, minnows or bait (except when attached to a hook or line for
the purposes of fishing) shall be thrown into the water. The articles shall be
removed from the premises or placed in receptacles provided for them.
   (g)   Any fisherman, 16 years of age or younger, must be accompanied on any
reservoir premises by an adult. No adult may be accompanied by more than two
children under the age of 16 years.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.14  SWIMMING.
   No person shall swim, wade or bathe in the waters of any of the city
reservoirs at any time.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.15  CURFEW AND RULES FOR BALL FIELD.
   (a)   The Mayor, as Director of Public Service, is hereby directed to
enforce a 10:30 p.m. curfew for ball playing at the Municipal Waterworks Ball
Field and to make such other rules and regulations for the use thereof as are
reasonable and necessary, taking into consideration the intended use of the
Ball Field.
   (b)   No person shall violate the 10:30 p.m. curfew or any rule or
regulation established by the Mayor, with respect to the City Waterworks Ball
Field, pursuant to division (a) hereof.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.16  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Any employee of the Police Department shall, in connection with his or
her duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Any employee of the Water Division, the City Utility Director and the
Mayor, as Director of Public Safety or as Director of Public Service, have the
authority to ask any person to leave reservoir grounds if the person has
violated any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 1064.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 11-96, passed 4-1-1996)
CHAPTER 1066:  MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
Section
   
1066.01   Lifeguard required
   
1066.02   Persons within fenced-in area
 
   
1066.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fences for swimming pools, see §
1462.14
   Swimming pools generally, see
Ch. 1482
Statutory reference:
   Construction and maintenance; acquisition of property, see R.C. § 717.01(Z)
   Power of municipality to establish and maintain, see R.C. § 755.12
§ 1066.01  LIFEGUARD REQUIRED.
   No person shall swim, play in or occupy the waters within the Municipal
Swimming Pool unless a certified lifeguard, under the supervision of the Board
of Park Commissioners, is present.
(Ord. 30-76, passed 8-2-1976)
§ 1066.02  PERSONS WITHIN FENCED-IN AREA.
   No person shall be inside the fenced-in area of the Municipal Swimming Pool
unless the person is under the direct supervision of authorized personnel of
the Board of Park Commissioners.
(Ord. 30-76, passed 8-2-1976)
§ 1066.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
PART TWELVE:  PLANNING AND ZONING
TITLE TWO - PLANNING
      Chapter
         
1220.   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
CHAPTER 1220:  CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
1220.01   Establishment; membership; authorization
   
1220.02   Rules; meetings; minutes and records
   
1220.03   Duties
Cross-reference:
   Action on final subdivision plats, see §
1244.05
   Authority re planned unit developments, see §
1290.03
   Imposition of conditions re zoning, see §
1296.03
   Planning Commission generally, see Charter §
100
Statutory reference:
   Control as to buildings, see R.C. § 713.04
   Establishment, see R.C. § 713.01
   Planning Commission as Platting Commission, see R.C. § 713.03
   Powers and duties, see R.C. § 713.02
§ 1220.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; AUTHORIZATION.
   A City Planning Commission is hereby established in and for the city,
pursuant to R.C. § 713.01, to consist of six members, including the Mayor, the
President of the Board of Park Commissioners, and four citizens of the city who
shall serve without compensation and who shall be appointed by the Mayor for
terms of six years each.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1220.02  RULES; MEETINGS; MINUTES AND RECORDS.
   The City Planning Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of
its affairs in keeping with the provisions of this Part Twelve of the Codified
Ordinances. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such
other times as the Commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be a public record and be filed in the office of
the Commission.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1220.03  DUTIES.
   For the purpose of this Part Twelve, the City Planning Commission shall have
the following duties:
   (a)   Initiate proposed amendments to the Zoning Code, including both
changes in the text or changes of the use district of any parcel of land;
   (b)   Review all proposed amendments to the Zoning Code in accordance with §
1260.05 and make recommendations to City Council, including both changes in the
text or changes of the use district of any parcel of land, whether initiated by
City Council or initiated by any owner or lessee of the land in question;
   (c)   Review all planned unit developments in accordance with
Chapter 1290 and make recommendations to City Council;
   (d)   Review all site plans whenever specifically required elsewhere in the
Zoning Code; and
   (e)   Review any site plan for any development when deemed necessary by the
Zoning Inspector, particularly where such development would result in an
increase in impervious surface in the lot or an increase in the need for off-
street parking, or would have an impact on traffic flow or circulation in the
immediate area.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
TITLE FOUR:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
1240.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
         
1242.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
         
1244.   SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
         
1246.   DESIGN STANDARDS
         
1248.   IMPROVEMENTS
         
1250.   OPEN SPACE AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
         SUBDIVISION APPENDICES:
            
APPX. I.   THREE-MILE LIMIT FOR SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
            
APPX. II.   MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISION CHARTS
            
APPX. III.   TYPICAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
            
APPX. IV.   TYPICAL FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
            
APPX. V.   OPEN SPACE AND THOROUGHFARE PLAN
            
APPX. VI.   PARKS AND TRANSPORTATION PLAN
            
APPX. VII.   SAMPLE FORMS
CHAPTER 1240:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1240.01   Official name
   
1240.02   Purpose
   
1240.03   Jurisdiction
   
1240.04   Administration
   
1240.05   Interpretation
   
1240.06   Separability
   
1240.07   Conflicts of laws
   
1240.08   Amendments
   
1240.09   Construction of language; definitions
Cross-reference:
   Fee simple title to vest in city, see Charter §
99
   Plat required, see Charter §§
98,
101
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §
1466.16
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see  R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1240.01  OFFICIAL NAME.
   The official name of these Subdivision Regulations shall be the "Subdivision
Regulations of Shelby, Ohio" and the same shall be referred to herein as "these
Regulations".
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.02  PURPOSE.
   These Regulations are adopted by the city for the purpose of protecting the
health, safety and general welfare of residents of the city; to regulate the
development of subdivided lands; to promote the proper arrangement of streets
and lots; to provide for the adequate and convenient provision of open spaces,
utilities and access to service and emergency vehicles; to ensure adequate
provision of water, drainage, sewer and other sanitary facilities; and to
provide for the administration of these Regulations to ensure the equitable
processing of all subdivision plats by providing uniform standards and
procedures for observance by both the approving authority and the subdivider.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.03  JURISDICTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, these
Regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of land within the city and
the territory within three miles of the corporate limits thereof. The City
Planning Commission shall have the power of approval of plats. Having adopted
an Open Space and Thoroughfare Plan and a Parks and Transportation Plan for the
territory within the city limits and for the territory within the three miles
of the city, the City Planning Commission may receive advice from the Regional
Planning Commission upon all subdivision plats located within the three-mile
limit.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any unincorporated
territory when all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The township in which the territory is located has a zoning
resolution covering all the unincorporated territory in the township;
      (2)   The county in which the territory is located has a county or
regional planning commission; and
      (3)   Subdivision regulations other than municipal subdivision
regulations are in effect in the county in which the unincorporated territory
is located.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Applicable maps, see Appendices
I ,
V and
VI following the text of
Ch. 1250
§ 1240.04  ADMINISTRATION.
   These Regulations shall be administered by the city in accordance with
Chapter 1242. 
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.05  INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions and requirements of these Regulations shall be construed to
be minimum requirements, and nothing herein shall prohibit the subdivider from
exceeding these minimum requirements. 
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.06  SEPARABILITY. 
   If any section, division, clause, phrase or part of these Regulations is for
any reason held invalid by a court or competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of these Regulations
or the application of these provisions to any person or circumstance.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.07  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   The provisions of these Regulations shall supplement any and all laws of the
state, ordinances of the city or county and any and all rules promulgated under
authority of such laws relating to the purpose or scope of these Regulations.
When the requirements of these Regulations differ from the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.08  AMENDMENTS.
   These Regulations may be amended following public hearings and other
requirements specified in R.C. §§ 711.09 and 711.10.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1240.09  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE; DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Rules of construction. The following rules of construction shall apply
to the provisions of these regulations:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
      (3)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
words "may" and "should" are permissive.
      (4)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or units
connected by the conjunction "and" or "or", the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
         A.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply.
         B.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly but not in combination.
      (5)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
      (6)   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied".
      (7)   The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel".
      (8)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
provisions of these regulations and any caption or illustration, the provisions
shall control.
      (9)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of these regulations, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Alley." See "street".
      (2)   "Block." Subdivided property surrounded by, but not separated by,
one or more of the following man-made or physical land features: private or
public dedicated streets, unsubdivided acreage, rivers or streams, or any other
physical feature which prevents continuity of development.
      (3)   "Building setback line." A line establishing the limits of a yard
which abuts a street and in which no building may be located.
      (4)   "City." City of Shelby, Ohio.
      (5)   "Comprehensive Development Plan." A plan, or any portion thereof,
adopted by the City Planning Commission and/or the City Council showing the
general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities
including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major streets, parks,
schools and other community facilities. This Plan establishes the goals,
objectives and policies of the community.
      (6)   "County." Richland County, Ohio.
      (7)   "Covenant." A written promise or pledge.
      (8)   "Cul-de-sac." See "street".
      (9)   "Culvert." A transverse drain that channels under a bridge, street
or driveway.
      (10)   "Dead-end street." See "street".
      (11)   "Density." The number of dwelling units that can be developed on a
given acre of land.
      (12)   "Developer." Any individual, subdivider, firm, association,
syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing
proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land for himself
or herself or for another.
      (13)   "Easement." A quantity of land over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, a utility or a
particular person, for a specific use or purpose.
      (14)   "Engineer, professional." A person registered to practice
professional engineering by the State Board of Registration as specified in
R.C. § 4733.14.
      (15)   "Flood plain." That land which has been or may hereafter be
covered by flood waters, including but not limited to the regulatory flood. For
the purpose of these regulations, the regulatory flood shall be deemed to be a
flood of 100-year frequency. "Flood plain" shall include land designated as
flood hazard areas on Federal Emergency Management Agency approved flood plain
maps.
      (16)   "Improvements." Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, storm sewer
outfall, culverts, streetlights, street trees, flood control and drainage
facilities, and the appurtenances required to render land suitable for the
proposed use.
      (17)   "Licensed land surveyor." A person licensed to practice surveying
by the State Board of Registration.
      (18)   "Lot." A division of land separated or intended to be separated
from other divisions of land by description on a recorded subdivision plat or
recorded survey map, or by metes and bounds for the purpose of sale, lease or
separate use.
      (19)   "Lot, corner." A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting
two or more intersecting streets.
      (20)   "Lot, double frontage (through lot)." A lot, other than a corner
lot, that abuts more than one street.
      (21)   "Lot frontage." The portion of a lot nearest the street. All sides
of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered lot frontage with respect to
corner lots and double frontage lots.
      (22)   "Lot measurements." A lot shall be measured as follows:
         A.   The depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the near most points of the side lot lines in the rear.
         B.   The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured at the minimum building setback line; provided, however, that the
width between side lot lines at their foremost point (where they intersect with
the street line) shall not be less than 80% of the required lot width.
      (23)   "Lot, minimum area of." The area of a lot computed exclusive of
any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street.
      (24)   "Major Thoroughfare Plan." The comprehensive plan adopted by the
City Planning Commission indicating the general locations recommended for
arterial, collector and local thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the
city and the unincorporated areas within three miles thereof.
      (25)   "Monuments." Boundary and lot markers which conform to the
regulations of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and
Surveyors, as authorized by R.C. § 4733.07.
      (26)   "Open space." An area, open and unobstructed between the ground
and sky, which may be on the same lot with a building.
      (27)   "Open space development." Any subdivision of land which has both
individual building sites and common open space areas, such as park and
recreation areas, and which is planned, designed and organized as a unified
development capable of providing a variety of residential dwellings.
      (28)   "Out lot." Property, shown on a subdivision plat outside of the
boundaries of the land to be developed, which is to be excluded from the
development of the subdivision.
      (29)   "Pedestrian walkway." A dedicated public right-of-way limited to
pedestrian use.
      (30)   "Performance bond." An agreement between a subdivider or developer
and the city, for the amount of the estimated construction cost, guaranteeing
the completion of physical improvements by the developer according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed in the agreement.
      (31)   "Planned unit development (PUD)." Any subdivision of land where
both individual building sites and common property devoted to parks or other
recreation facilities are designed and organized to be capable of satisfactory
use and operation as a self-contained residential area. A "PUD" may include
shopping centers and planned industrial park developments.
      (32)   "Plat." See "subdivision plat".
      (33)   "Preliminary plan." A drawing for the purpose of study of a major
subdivision, which, if approved, authorizes with the preparation of a
subdivision plat.
      (34)   "Public utility." Any person, firm, association, corporation,
trust, board, commission or other legal entity, duly authorized to furnish to
the public, under state, county or municipal regulations, gas, steam,
electricity, sewage disposal and treatment, communication, telegraph,
transportation or water.
      (35)   "Public way." An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch,
easement, expressway, freeway, highway, lane, parkway, right-of-way, road,
sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other way, in which the
general public or a public entity has a right, or which are dedicated, whether
improved or not.
      (36)   "Regional Planning Commission." The Richland County Regional
Planning Commission.
      (37)   "Reserve strip." A strip of land parallel to, or at the end of and
abutting, a thoroughfare, controlling the means of access onto a property.
      (38)   "Right-of-way." A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a
public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs,
lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include
special features (required by topography or treatment), such as grade
separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
      (39)   "Sewers, central or group." An approved sewage disposal system
which provides a collection network and disposal system and central sewage
treatment facility for a single development or community.
      (40)   "Sewers, on-site." A septic tank or similar installation on an
individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally
satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and which provides for the
proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and
sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
      (41)   "Sidewalk." That portion of the street right-of-way outside the
roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic (see also
"walkway").
      (42)   "Street, thoroughfare or road." A public dedicated right-of-way
which is used for the movement of goods and people, which may provide for
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties, which includes all
lands between the right-of-way lines, and which may incorporate the curbs,
sidewalks, landscaped areas, street pavement and berm. "Streets" shall be
further designated and defined as follows:
         A.   "Alley." A minor street used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties abutting another street.
         B.   "Arterial street." A general term denoting a highway primarily
for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and a large volume of traffic,
usually on a continuous route.
         C.   "Collector street." A thoroughfare, whether within a residential,
industrial, commercial or other type of development, which primarily carries
traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principal
entrance to, and circulation routes within, a residential subdivision.
         D.   "Cul-de-sac." A local street of relatively short length with one
end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
         E.   "Dead-end street." A street temporarily having only one outlet
for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.
         F.   "Half street." A street on which only one side has been dedicated
to a governmental agency.
         G.   "Local street." A street primarily for providing access to
residential, commercial or other abutting property.
         H.   "Marginal access street." A local or collector street, parallel
and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting
properties and protection from arterial or collector streets.
      (43)   "Subdivider." See "developer".
      (44)   "Subdivision."
         A.   The division of any parcel of land, shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; provided, however, that
the division of land into parcels of five acres or larger not involving any new
streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between
adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional
building sites, shall be exempted; or
         B.   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street, except private streets serving industrial structures, and the division
or allocation of land as open space for common use by owners, occupants or
lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewers, storm water drainage or other public facilities.
      (45)   "Subdivision, minor." A division of a parcel of land that does not
require a plat to be approved by the planning authority according to R.C. §
711.131. However, note City Charter, § 98.
      (46)   "Subdivision plat." The final map or drawing upon which the
subdivider's plan for subdivision of land is presented to the City Planning
Commission for approval.
      (47)   "Variance." A modification of the strict terms of the relevant
regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest
and where, owing to physical conditions peculiar to the property and not as a
result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
      (48)   "Vicinity map." A drawing located on the plat which sets forth, by
dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use
to other nearby developments, landmarks or community facilities, in order to
better locate and orient the area in question.
      (49)   "Walkway." A dedicated public way, four feet or more in width, for
pedestrian use only, whether along the side of a road or not.
      (50)   "Watershed." The drainage basin in which the subdivision drains,
or that land whose drainage is affected by the subdivision.
      (51)   "Yard." A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from three feet above
the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided that accessories,
ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height
limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
         A.   "Yard, front." A yard extending between side lot lines across the
front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal
building.
         B.   "Yard, rear." A yard extending between side lot lines across the
rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
         C.   "Yard, side." A yard extending from the principal building to the
side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines
establishing the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 13-2019, passed 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 1242:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
   
1242.01   Administration
   
1242.02   Recording of plat
   
1242.03   Sale of land within subdivisions
   
1242.04   Revision of plat after approval
   
1242.05   Filing, plan review and inspection fees
   
1242.06   Variances
   
1242.07   Appeals
 
   
1242.99   Penalty; equitable remedies
Cross-reference:
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1220
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1242.01  ADMINISTRATION.
   These Regulations shall be administered by the following state, city and/or
county agencies or their designated representatives:
   (a)   The Shelby City Planning Commission shall act as the coordinating city
agency, responsible for receiving, processing and reviewing all minor
subdivisions (except those which meet all requirements of §
1244.02(a)) and major subdivisions as to conformity with zoning and other
regulations which affect the division of land, and for approving the design
layout of the preliminary plan and final plat.
   (b)   The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, the City Health
Commissioner, the County Sanitary Engineer, The City Engineer and the Richland
County Health Department, whoever or whichever has jurisdiction, shall be
responsible for reviewing and approving the type of water system, home sewage
disposal system and sanitary sewerage systems designed to serve minor and major
subdivisions.
   (c)   The Shelby City Engineer shall be responsible for reviewing,
inspecting and approving the improvement plans and the installation of streets
and other utility systems. The City Engineer shall also be responsible for
ensuring that the improvement specifications set forth in
Chapter 1248 are met as a subdivision is developed in order to assure both
soundness of layout and economy of construction and maintenance.
   (d)   The Shelby City Planning Commission shall be responsible for managing
all affairs required in connection with the dedication of public rights-of-way
and other public sites designated on a minor or major subdivision.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.02  RECORDING OF PLAT.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner
prescribed herein.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.03  SALE OF LAND WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS.
   No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision
shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, by exhibition of or by the use
of a plat of the subdivision, before such plat has been approved and recorded
in the manner prescribed in these Regulations. The description of such lot or
parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction
from the application of these Regulations.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.04  REVISION OF PLAT AFTER APPROVAL.
   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat
of a subdivision after approval has been given and an endorsement is made in
writing on a plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted and the changes
approved by those public bodies in authority.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.05  FILING, PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (a)   Filing fees.  Filing fees shall be made payable to the Director of
Finance and Public Record.
      (1)   Major subdivision.  At the time of submitting the application for
final plat approval, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee of $100.
      (2)   Planned unit development.  At the time of submitting for final plat
approval, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee of $200.
   (b)   Plan review and inspection fees.  Plans, quantities and an itemized
cost estimate prepared by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for review and approval for all street, storm sewer, water line,
electric line and outlet drainage improvements. The same shall be required for
sanitary sewer and sewage treatment improvements, to be submitted to the City
Health Commissioner or County Sanitary Engineer for his or her review and
approval. A certified check in the amount of 1% of the approved construction
cost estimates shall be deposited with the City Finance Director to pay the
costs of field inspection of the construction to assure its conformity with the
approved plans. A record shall be kept of the actual costs incurred by the City
Engineer, the City Health Commissioner and/or the County Sanitary Engineer for
the inspection.  The costs shall be charged against the amount deposited.  Any
remaining money shall be returned to the developer.
   (c)   Notification of engineer.  The engineer of jurisdiction shall be
notified 48 hours before work commences on any improvements.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.06  VARIANCES.
   (a)   The following regulations shall govern the granting of variances:
      (1)   Where the administrative authority finds that extraordinary and
unnecessary hardship may result from strict compliance with these Regulations,
due to exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, it may vary the
Regulations so as to relieve such hardship, provided that such relief may be
granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the
intent and purpose of these Regulations or the desirable development of the
neighborhood and community. Such variations shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations, the Comprehensive
Development Plan or the Zoning Code.
      (2)   In granting variances or modifications, the Planning Commission may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the
objective of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
   (b)   Reference should be made to Subdivision
Appendix VII, Form 7, following the text of
Chapter 1250, for a sample application for subdivision variance.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.07  APPEALS.
   Any person who believes that he or she has been aggrieved by these
Regulations or the action of the City Planning Commission has all the rights of
appeal as set forth in R.C. Chapter 711 or any other applicable provisions of
the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1242.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   The following penalties shall apply to violations of these Regulations:
   (a)   Whoever violates any rule or regulation adopted by the City Planning
Commission for the purpose of setting standards and requiring and securing the
construction of improvements within a subdivision, or fails to comply with any
order made pursuant thereto, is creating a public nuisance and the creation
thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by suit of
the city or any citizen thereof. Whoever violates these Regulations shall
forfeit and pay not less than $100, nor more than $1,000. Such sum may be
recovered with costs in a civil action brought in the Court of Common Pleas of
Richland County.
   (b)   A County Recorder who records a plat contrary to the provisions of
these Regulations shall forfeit and pay not less than $100, nor more than $500,
to be recovered with costs in a civil action by the City Law Director in the
name and for the use of the city.
   (c)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within or
without the city, transfers any lot, parcel or tract of such land from or in
accordance with a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder, shall forfeit and pay not less than $100,
nor more than $500 for each lot, parcel or tract or land so sold. The
description of such lot, parcel or tract by metes and bounds in the deed of
transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller from the forfeiture provided in
this section.
   (d)   Any person who disposes of, or offers for sale or lease, for a time
exceeding five years, any lot or any part of a lot in a subdivision before the
provisions of these Regulations are complied with, shall forfeit and pay not
less than $100, nor more than $500, for each lot or part of a lot so sold,
offered for sale or leased, to be recovered with costs in a civil action in the
name of the Director of Finance and Public Record for the use of the city.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
CHAPTER 1244:  SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Section
   
1244.01   Purpose
   
1244.02   Minor subdivisions
   
1244.03   Major subdivisions
   
1244.04   Preliminary plan stage
   
1244.05   Final subdivision plat stage
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1244.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify the steps that a subdivider shall
follow to subdivide land in the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, as set
forth in §
1240.03 of these Regulations.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1244.02  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Plat approval of a minor subdivision is not required if the proposed
subdivision of a parcel of land meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   A.   The proposed subdivision is located along an existing public
dedicated street or road and does not involve the opening, widening or
extension of any street or road.
         B.   The proposed subdivision involves no more than five lots after
the original tract has been completely subdivided. As used in this division,
"completely subdivided" means a tract which is divided into as many lots as the
subdivider intends for the tract.
         C.   The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable platting,
subdividing, zoning, health, sanitary or rules governing household sewage
treatment systems adopted under R.C. § 3718.02.
      (2)   The further division of an original tract which has been previously
divided into five lots requires the replatting of the original tract.
      (3)   Design standards, §§ 1246.02 and 1246.03, are to be met even though
plat approval is not required when a minor subdivision meets the conditions
described in divisions (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Any person proposing to create a subdivision which meets all of the
foregoing conditions shall submit the following information to the City
Engineer for approval without a plat:
      (1)   Two copies of a survey drawing and legal description of the parcel
or parcels involved, prepared by a licensed land surveyor. The survey shall
indicate the following:
         A.   The location of the proposed subdivision, including the tract,
boundaries, township, section, number, north arrow and scale;
         B.   The location of all existing streets on or abutting the parcel to
be subdivided;
         C.   Lot lines, with width and depth dimensions in feet;
         D.   The location and dimensions of the original tract not subdivided
into lots; and
         E.   Recording date, the names of recorded owners of the parcel to be
subdivided, and the certification and seal of the licensed land surveyor to the
effect that the survey made by him or her balances and closes and that all
dimensions and geodetic details are accurate and correct.
         F.   Evidence of compliance that the proposed subdivision has been
reviewed and approved by the Health Commissioner of the Shelby Health
Department or Richland Public Health, whoever or whichever has jurisdiction.
   (c)   (1)   After the City Engineer is satisfied that the proposed
subdivision is not contrary to the conditions set forth in division (a) of this
section, he or she shall give approval within seven working days after
submission and, upon presentation of an instrument of conveyance for the parcel
or parcels, shall  stamp "Approved: No plat required" and shall sign the
instrument. In the event the City Engineer is not satisfied that the proposed
subdivision complies with these regulations, then the applicant shall submit
all required information to the City Planning Commission for review and
consideration at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the proposed
subdivision is in accordance with these regulations, the Commission shall
approve the same and the Chairperson shall stamp and sign the instrument of
conveyance as required above.
      (2)   The City Charter, § 98, requires a plat for any subdivision. The
subdivider is advised to review the requirements of the Charter.
   (d)   Reference should be made to Appendix II, following the text of these
Subdivision Regulations, for provisions and charts relative to minor
subdivisions.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 13-2019, passed 7-15-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Affidavit of compliance, see Subdivision
Appendix VII, Sample Form No. 8, following the text of
Ch. 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations
§ 1244.03  MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Preapplication conference.  The subdivider may wish to consult with
the City Planning Commission or the City Engineer to avail himself or herself
of their advice and assistance in interpreting the purpose and effect of these
Regulations and the requirements and standards contained herein.
   (b)   Subdivision review and approval. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed
and approved in two stages:
      (1)   Preliminary plan stage; and
      (2)   Final plat stage.
   (c)   Submission to the Ohio Director of Transportation. Before any plat is
approved affecting any land within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed new
highway, or a highway for which changes are proposed as described in  the
certification to local officials by the Director of the Ohio Department of
Transportation, or any land within a radius of 500 feet from the point of
intersection of the centerline with any public road or highway, the Commission
shall give notice, by registered or certified mail, to the Director. The
Commission shall not approve the plat for 120 days from the date the notice is
received by the Director. If the Director notifies the Commission that he or
she shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the Commission shall refuse
to approve the plat if the land is included in the plat. If the Director
notifies the Commission that acquisition at this time is not in the public
interest, or upon expiration of the 120-day period or any extension thereof
agreed upon by the Director and the subdivider, the Commission shall, if the
plat is in conformity with all provisions of these Regulations, approve the
plat.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1244.04  PRELIMINARY PLAN STAGE.
   The preliminary plan stage requires the subdivider to provide all
information deemed necessary to enable the City Planning Commission to
determine that the proposed layout is in conformity with these regulations.
This step also ensures that the subdivider will not be required to expend
additional money without some indication that his or her final plat will be
approved.
   (a)   Application for preliminary plan approval. The subdivider must submit
an application for preliminary plan approval to the City Engineer's office or
his or her representative, with copies as required by divisions (a)(1) and (a)
(2) of this section. It is recommended that this plan be prepared by a person
capable of furnishing all the data required by division (b) of this section.
      (1)   Two copies of the application for preliminary plan approval; and
      (2)   Five copies of a preliminary plan within the city (nine copies for
a subdivision within the three-mile limit), prepared by a licensed land
surveyor, along with a reproducible tracing.
   (b)   Preliminary plan contents. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a
minimum scale of 100 feet to the inch (one inch = 100 feet) and shall be drawn
on one or more sheets no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size. When drawn on
several sheets, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision and match points
in each sheet shall be provided. The preliminary plan shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision (which shall not duplicate the
name of another subdivision in Richland County);
      (2)   The location of the proposed subdivision by township, range,
section, tract or other survey;
      (3)   The names, addresses and phone numbers of the property owner, the
developer and/or the engineer or surveyor who prepared the preliminary plan;
      (4)   The scale of the plan, north point and the date of the survey;
      (5)   The boundary lines of the proposed subdivision, showing bearings,
dimensions and acreage, based on available data;
      (6)   The location, right-of-way and pavement widths of all existing
streets within and adjacent to the subdivision;
      (7)   The existing topography within the boundaries of the subdivision at
an interval of two-foot contours;
      (8)   The location and extent of all significant physical features of the
site, including watercourses, lakes (natural and man-made), marshes, tree
coverage and other significant natural features;
      (9)   The location of all existing sewers, water lines, power
transmission lines, pipelines and other utilities;
      (10)   The location and dimensions of all proposed utility and sewer
lines, showing their connections with the existing system;
      (11)   The location, width and purpose of all other easements or rights-
of-way;
      (12)   The present zoning classification of the tract and adjacent
parcels, and proposed zoning changes, if any;
      (13)   The proposed arrangement of all lots, and the numbers and
approximate dimensions of each lot;
      (14)   Required building setback lines, with dimensions;
      (15)   The location and size of all parcels to be reserved or dedicated
for public use;
      (16)   A development summary, including total acreage, number of lots,
average lot size, and acres in streets, public sites and other public uses; and
      (17)   A vicinity map, on or accompanying the plan, indicating the
relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing subdivisions and existing
and proposed thoroughfares, and the proposed connections between existing and
proposed streets and roads.
   (c)   Submission of preliminary plan. Applications for tentative approval of
the preliminary plat must be submitted to the City Engineer or his or her
representative 21 days before the regularly scheduled Planning Commission
meeting. The City Engineer or his or her representative will notify the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission to place the proposed plan approval on
the agenda of the next Planning Commission meeting.
   (d)   Transmission of preliminary plan. The City Engineer or his or her
representative shall transmit copies of the preliminary plan to the City
Planning Commission members, the City Health Commissioner, the Shade Tree
Commission, Fire and Police Chiefs, and to school boards and utility
departments or companies, as he or she deems necessary, for their review and
comment. For subdivisions within the three-mile limit, additional copies shall
be transmitted to the County Engineer, the County Health Department, the County
Sanitary Engineer, the Richland County Regional Planning Commission and the
appropriate township clerk.
   (e)   Review of preliminary plan. The City Planning Commission shall
complete its review of the preliminary plan as well as comments from the other
departments and agencies by or at the first scheduled Planning Commission
meeting after the date of submittal of the application. The Commission shall
inform the subdivider as to which city, county or consulting officials must be
contacted by him or her to determine the extent and nature of the improvements
required by these regulations.
      (1)   Upon completion of the review, the action, recommendations and
negotiation results of the Commission shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary plan, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be retained by the Commission and the other returned to the
subdivider.
      (2)   Approval of the preliminary plan by the City Planning Commission is
not an acceptance of the plan for record, but only an expression of approval of
a general plan as a guide for the preparation of a final subdivision plat for
approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of these
regulations. Approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12 months
unless, upon application by the subdivider, the City Planning Commission grants
an extension. If a final subdivision plat has not been submitted for approval
within the time period, another preliminary plan must be submitted in
accordance with these regulations.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 13-2019,
passed 7-15-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Preliminary plan approval, see Subdivision
Appendix VII, Sample Form No. 4, following the text of
Ch. 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations
   Preliminary plan contents, see Subdivision
Appendix III following the text of
Ch. 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations
§ 1244.05  FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT STAGE.
   (a)   Final subdivision plat required.
      (1)   The subdivider, after receiving approval of the preliminary plan
for the proposed subdivision, shall submit a final plat of the proposed
subdivision and drawings and specification of all improvements required
therein. The final plat shall have incorporated all of the changes required by
the City Planning Commission in its review of the preliminary plan. Otherwise,
it shall conform to the preliminary plan. The final plat may be submitted for
approval in sections, provided that a preliminary plan has been approved for
the entire subdivision. The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor and supplementary improvement plans and specifications shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer.
      (2)   The following information shall be submitted to the City Planning
Commission for final subdivision plat approval:
         A.   Two copies of the application for final plat approval (see
Subdivision Appendix VII, Sample Form No. 5, following the text of
Chapter 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations);
         B.   Five copies of the final subdivision plat and a reproducible
tracing (nine copies if in the three-mile limit);
         C.   Five copies of final plat improvement drawings;
         D.   Two copies of protective covenants, if proposed;
         E.   Two copies of performance guarantees approved by the City Law
Director and reviewed by the City Engineer;
         F.   A receipt indicating payment of plat filing fees (see §
1242.05); and
         G.   Plan checking and field inspection fees (see §
1242.05).
   (b)   Contents of final subdivision plat drawing. The subdivision plat shall
be drawn to a minimum of 18 by 24 inches and a maximum of 24 by 36 inches
outside dimensions and shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 100 feet to one
inch. When necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision. When on several sheets, match points
shall be shown. The subdivision plat shall show the following:
      (1)   Identification.
         A.   The proposed name of the subdivision, the township, the tract and
the original lot or section number;
         B.   A location map at one inch = 2,000 feet (U.S.G.S.) scale, with a
north arrow; and
         C.   The name and address of the subdivider and the registered
engineer and/or surveyor who prepared the plat, with appropriate registration
numbers and seals.
      (2)   Control points. All dimensions, angles and bearings are to be
referred to control points, the nearest established street line, section lines
or other established points;
      (3)   Lines and boundaries. Centerlines and right-of-way lines of
streets, easements and other rights-of-way; corporation lines; property lines
of all lots and parcels, with distances; radii, arcs or chords and tangents of
all curves (nearest one-hundredth of a foot), bearings or deflection angles
(nearest second);
      (4)   Streets. Street names of each street within the proposed
subdivision and those adjoining the subdivision; right-of-way width accurately
shown with dimensions;
      (5)   Building setback lines. Building setback lines accurately shown
with dimensions;
      (6)   Lot identification. Lots shall be numbered in consecutive order.
When the subdivision is submitted in sections, lots shall be numbered
consecutively as each section is submitted, whether or not the sections are
contiguous;
      (7)   Total site data. Total site data shall include acreage and the
number of lots in parks and other public uses;
      (8)   Land for public use. Show boundaries and identify the use of all
parcels which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use or easements;
      (9)   Monuments. The location and description of those found, set or to
be set;
      (10)   Adjoining plats and owners. The names of recorded owners of
adjoining unplatted land and reference to subdivision plats of adjoining
platted land by name, volume and page of the Recorder's plat records;
      (11)   Certification of survey. Certification and seal by a licensed land
surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her
which balances and closes, that monuments shown thereon exist or shall be set
as shown, and that all dimensions and geodetic details are correct;
      (12)   Certification by owners. Notarized certification by the owner or
owners of the subdivision that the streets and other public areas have been
dedicated and that there are no unpaid taxes or special assessments against the
land contained in the plat;
      (13)   Notations.
         A.   Certification of the City Engineer and City Law Director that
performance guarantees, if required, for the construction of required
improvements, have been provided.
         B.   Acceptance of dedication of streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water lines and rights-of-way by the local governing body for its
ownership and future maintenance.
         C.   Proper notations for transfer and record by the Richland County
Auditor, the County Recorder and the tax map draftsman.
         D.   Approval of plat by the Chairperson of the City Planning
Commission, the City Health Commissioner, and the City Engineer. If within the
three-mile limit, include signatures of County Engineer, the County Sanitary
Engineer, the County Health Department and the Director-Secretary of the
Richland County Regional Planning Commission.
         E.   Acceptance of all areas of public use by the City Planning
Commission or the Township Trustees. Where land is accepted for parks, the City
Board of Park Commissioners shall be notified.
         F.   Certification of the Richland County Auditor that there are no
delinquent taxes or delinquent special assessments against the land contained
in the plat.
      (14)   Protective covenants.
         A.   If common property and/or improvements are a part of the plat,
then the developer or persons seeking approval of the plat shall, prior to that
approval, provide and submit to the Shelby Planning Commission copies of
protective covenants, easements and documents to be recorded, providing for the
ownership, maintenance, repair and financing of the common property and/or
improvements. Reference to these protective covenants shall be included in all
deeds conveying the lots and lands described within the subdivision plats.
         B.   The maintenance and repair of common property and/or improvements
shall not be the responsibility of the public unless, by specific legislative
enactment, the legislative authority accepts responsibility for the property or
improvements.
   (c)   Improvement plans and specifications.
      (1)   Drawings showing cross-sections, profile, elevations, construction
details and specifications for all required improvements shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer. The improvement plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the design standards and required improvements set forth in
Chapters
1246 and
1248.
      (2)   If it becomes necessary to modify improvements as approved due to
unforeseen circumstances, the subdivider shall inform the City Engineer in
writing of the conditions requiring the modifications and shall receive written
approval of the modifications.
   (d)   Transmission of subdivision plat. The Chairperson of the City Planning
Commission shall transmit copies of the final plat to the same individuals and
agencies who or which received the preliminary plan (see §
1244.04(d)).
   (e)   City Planning Commission action.
      (1)   The City Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the final
plat within 30 days after it has been filed. Failure of the Commission to act
upon the final plat within that time shall be deemed to be approval of the
plat. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated
in the records of the Commission, and a copy of the record shall be forwarded
to the subdivider. The Commission shall not disapprove the plat if the
developer has done everything that was required and has proceeded in accordance
with the conditions and standards specified in the approved preliminary plan.
If disapproved, the subdivider shall make the necessary corrections and
resubmit the plat within 30 days to the Commission for its final approval.
      (2)   Approval of a subdivision plat may be given in one of the two
following ways:
         A.   Before construction of improvements. The City Planning Commission
may give final approval before all required improvements are installed,
provided that a construction agreement and performance bond or other guarantee
or security acceptable to the City Law Director and the City Engineer, for the
purpose of assuring installation of the improvements based on approved detailed
engineering plans and an estimate approved by the City Engineer, is provided.
Upon receipt of the City Engineer's notification and determination that all the
requirements of these regulations have been met, the City Planning Commission
shall give final approval and shall indicate that approval and the date on the
tracing of the final subdivision plat, is provided.
         B.   After construction of improvements. After the subdivider has
obtained conditional approval, as indicated in this section, and has installed
all required improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the City
Engineer shall certify that the improvements have been satisfactorily installed
in compliance with the approved plans and the construction agreement. Upon
receipt of the City Engineer's notification and determination that all the
requirements of these regulations have been met, the City Planning Commission
shall give final approval and shall indicate that approval and the date on the
tracing of the final subdivision plat.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 13-2019,
passed 7-15-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Notations, see Subdivision
Appx. VII, Sample Form 10, following the text of
Ch. 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations
CHAPTER 1246:  DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
1246.01   Purpose
   
1246.02   Physical considerations
   
1246.03   Minor subdivisions
   
1246.04   Major subdivisions
Cross-reference:
   Street improvements, see
Ch. 1022
   Street signs, see §
1248.03
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1246.01  PURPOSE.
   The following provisions describe the design principles and standards which
a subdivider shall be required to follow in the layout of a subdivision as
shown on the applicable standard drawings. These principles and standards shall
be carried out in compliance with these Regulations, other regulations of the
state or city and the specifications for each of the various improvements as
may be required by the City Engineer and the City Division of Health, according
to the nature of the improvements.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1246.02  PHYSICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   Major and minor subdivisions shall be planned to take advantage of the
topographic conditions of the land, to economize in the construction of public
facilities and services and to reduce the amount of grading and minimize the
destruction of trees, lakes, watercourses and topsoil.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1246.03  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Lots.  All lots shall abut a public or private street or thoroughfare.
      (1)   Zoning conformance.  The lot size, width and depth, and the minimum
building setback lines, shall conform to any existing zoning regulations.
      (2)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet at the minimum
building setback line.
      (3)   Lot depth.  No lot depth shall exceed three and one-half times its
width. The width, for this purpose, shall be at the building setback line.
      (4)   Minimum building setback lines (from the right-of-way line).
 
A. State highways and major thoroughfares 40 feet
B. Collector streets                      35 feet
C. All other streets                      30 feet
Corner lots shall meet minimum setbacks on both sides abutting the
intersecting streets.
 
      (5)   Side yards.  The minimum building setback from side lot lines shall
be five feet.
      (6)   Rear yards.  The minimum building setback from the rear lot line
shall be 30 feet.
   (b)   Storm sewers. 
      (1)   If the minor subdivision is in an area where a public storm sewer
system is not available, the subdivider shall do the grading and provide such
drainage structures, including rain water drainage, for each individual
building on each lot as required by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Where a storm sewer system is reasonably accessible and adequate,
as determined by the City Engineer, the subdivision shall extend and connect
with the storm sewer system and shall do such grading and provide such drainage
structures to connect each building on each lot to the storm sewer system as
required by the City Engineer.
   (c)   Water supply and sanitary sewers.  Where public or community water
supply and sanitary sewer facilities are not available, individual water wells
and sanitary sewer disposal facilities shall be provided for each lot in the
subdivision as required by the City Health Commissioner or another agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1246.04  MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Streets.
      (1)   Arrangement.  The arrangement, character, extent, width and
location of all streets shall conform to the Open Space and Thoroughfare Plan
and the Parks and Transportation Plan of current adoption (see Subdivision
Appendices
V and
VI following the text of
Chapter 1250 of these Subdivision Regulations).  The design of the proposed
streets shall provide for both the continuation of existing streets and access
to adjacent unplatted lands so that the entire area can be served with a
coordinated street system.
      (2)   Street classifications.
         A.   Major arterial thoroughfares shall be planned for the
continuation of movement of fast traffic entering or leaving the urban area, or
between points of heavy traffic generation, and from one section of a community
to another. Major arterials should have few intersections with local streets
and collector thoroughfares. These thoroughfares should be spaced at least one
and one-half miles apart.
         B.   Minor arterial thoroughfares should interconnect with and augment
the major arterial system. Minor arterials should provide for intra-community
trips and movement of traffic from heavy traffic generators to major arterial
thoroughfares. Minor arterials should contain few intersections with local
streets. These thoroughfares should be spaced at least three-fourths of a mile
apart.
         C.   Collector thoroughfares shall provide a traffic route from local
streets to arterial thoroughfares. Collector streets normally contain a
relatively large number of intersections with major or minor arterial streets.
These streets should be spaced at least one-fourth of a mile apart.
         D.   Local streets shall provide direct and full access to each lot
and shall be laid out so their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
         E.   Service drives may be required along existing or proposed major
or minor arterial streets to provide access to lots along such thoroughfares.
Service drives shall be designed to provide a secondary means of access.
      (3)   Street right-of-way widths and grades.  See
Table 1 following the text of this division (a).
      (4)   Half streets.  Half streets shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Cul-de-sacs. Streets designed to be used as cul-de-sacs shall not
be longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a pavement
turn-around diameter of at least 100 feet, and a street right-of-way line
diameter of at least 120 feet.
      (6)   Reserve strips.  Reserve strips controlling access shall be
prohibited, except where their control is definitely placed in the city under
conditions approved by the City Planning Commission.
      (7)   Alignment.
         A.   Horizontal.
            1.   Street jogs.  Street jogs with a centerline offset of less
than 150 feet shall not be permitted.
            2.   Intersections.  Streets shall be laid out to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other
street at an angle of less than 80 degrees. Whenever possible, four-way
intersections of local residential streets should be avoided, and T-type
intersections are to be encouraged. Multiple intersections involving junctions
of more than two streets shall be avoided.
            3.   Intersection approaches.  Approaches to street intersections
shall provide for a minimum stopping sight distance of 100 feet from the
centerline of the street intersected.
         B.   Vertical.  Approaches to intersections shall be reduced to a
grade not exceeding 3% for a distance of at least 100 feet.
      (8)   Street names.  No street names shall be used which will duplicate
or be confused with the names of existing streets within the city. Street names
shall be subject to approval by the City Planning Commission.
      (9)   Medians.  Whenever boulevard streets are proposed, the subdivider
or developer shall submit to the City Planning Commission a written agreement
for the maintenance of all median strips and the lawn areas and planting
therein. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer or an
association of homeowners whose lots abut onto the proposed boulevard.
Table 1
Street Design Standards
 
               Minimum Minimum  Maximum   Minimum   Maximum  Minimum  Minimum
Street         Right-  Pavement Degree of Radius of Percent  Percent  Corner
Classification of-Way  Width    Curvature Curvature of Grade of Grade Radii
               (ft.)   (ft.) e.           (ft.)                       (ft.) d.
Major Arterial 100 a.  b.       3         1,910     4.0      0.6      30
Thoroughfare
Minor Arterial 80 a.   b.       5         1,150     5.0      0.6      30
Thoroughfare
Collector      60 a.   35       8         717       6.0      0.5      20
Thoroughfare
Local Street
(Commercial or 60 a.   35       10        575       7.0      0.5      20
Industrial)
Local
Residential    50 a.   27       10        575       7.0 c.   0.5      20
(Multiple
Family)
Local
Residential    50 a.   27       20        290       7.0 c.   0.5      20
Streets and
Cul-de-Sacs
NOTES TO SCHEDULE:
a.   Where a boulevard-type street is proposed, the minimum right-of-way
shall be increased by an amount equal to the width of the proposed median.
b.   Requirement will vary with design speed and capacity.  To be
determined by the engineer of jurisdiction.
c.   Maximum may be greater due to topography if in accordance with the
application of standard engineering practice.  To be approved by the City
Engineer.
d.   Right-of-way line of street.
e.   Extra width pavement may be required for parking or turn lanes.
 
   (b)   Easements.
      (1)   Utility easements.  Electric, cable television and telephone lines
shall be buried if located at the front of lots. If utilities are located at
the side or rear of lots, easements shall be provided for utilities and shall
be at least 20 feet wide (ten feet per lot). Utilities may be buried at the
side or rear of lots. Electric, cable television and telephone shall be buried,
if at front, within a ten-foot easement adjacent to right-of-way.
      (2)   Drainageway easements.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a
drainageway (a storm sewer easement or drainage right-of-way), a public
easement conforming substantially to the lines of such drainage shall be
provided. The easement or right-of-way shall be 15 feet wide, or of such
further width as is necessary, and shall generally follow rear and side lot
lines.
   (c)   Blocks. 
      (1)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet or be less than 400 feet.
      (2)   Pedestrian walkways, with right-of-way, not more than eight feet
wide, may be required across blocks where the City Planning Commission deems
that pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds, parks, open space, shopping
centers and other community facilities is necessary.
   (d)   Lots.
      (1)   Zoning conformance.  The lot size, width and depth, and the minimum
building setback lines, shall conform to existing zoning and Health Board
regulations of the appropriate jurisdiction. For lots within the city, the
following minimum requirements shall be met:
         A.   Lot width.  Sixty feet at minimum building setback line.
         B.   Building setback.
 
Yard Type                                      Setback
1. Front yard
   a.   State highways and major thoroughfar40 feet
   b.   Collector streets                   35 feet
   c.   All other streets                   30 feet
2. Side yards                                  5 feet
3. Rear yard                                   30 feet
 
      (2)   Corner lots.  Corner lots shall have extra width to permit the
appropriate building setback from, and orientation to, both streets.
      (3)   Access to public streets.  The subdivision of land shall provide
each lot with frontage on a public or private street.
      (4)   Double frontage lots. 
         A.   Residential lots shall not be laid out so that they have frontage
on more than one street, except:
            1.   Where lots are adjacent to the intersection of two streets;
or 
            2.   Where it is necessary to separate residential developments
from arterial thoroughfares.
         B.   Where double frontage lots are created adjacent to major or minor
arterial thoroughfares, a reserve strip 12 feet wide along the major
thoroughfare shall be deeded to the appropriate governmental unit. The plat
shall state that there shall be no right of access across the reserve strip.
The City Planning Commission may require that a ten-foot-wide planting screen
be provided along the boundary of the reserve strip.
      (5)   Lot depth.  No lot depth shall exceed three and one-half times the
lot width. The width, for this purpose, shall be at the building setback line.
   (e)   Public sites and open spaces.
      (1)   Public facilities.  The subdivision design may provide land areas
for public use as provided in §
1248.04, which areas conform to the City Planning Commission's Open Space and
Thoroughfare Plan.
      (2)   Natural features.  Natural features, such as scenic views, water
bodies and fine groves of trees, shall be given due consideration for their
preservation.
   (f)   Utilities.
      (1)   Storm drainage.  The design of the subdivision shall provide the
necessary means to assure complete drainage in and adjacent to the property to
be developed or subdivided.
         A.   The subdivider or his or her engineer shall submit all drainage
calculations along with the improvement plans. A ten-year storm frequency is to
be used based on sound engineering judgment.
         B.   When necessary, outlet ditches or closed storm sewers of an
approved type and size shall be required as part of the construction. If there
are easements or rights-of-way to be obtained by the subdivider for
construction and future maintenance, these rights-of-way or easements shall be
shown on the final plat. Two copies of the easements shall be furnished to the
engineer of jurisdiction.
         C.   Any roadway ditches having a grade in excess of 2% shall have an
approved type of ditch using concrete, stone, sod or underground drainage, with
sufficient inlets spaced at intervals so as to keep the volume of water at a
low level.
         D.   All storm drain tile shall be a minimum of 12-inch diameter
concrete tongue and groove, C-14-86-CLIII, State of Ohio Department of
Transportation Construction and Material Specifications, or an approved equal
(minimum bury with two-foot cover).
         E.   If the subdivision is in an area where a public storm sewer
system is not available, the subdivider shall perform such grading and provide
such drainage structures, including rain water drainage, for each individual
building on each lot as required by the City Engineer.
         F.   Where a storm sewer system is reasonably accessible and adequate,
as determined by the City Engineer, the subdivision shall extend and connect
with the storm sewer system and shall perform the grading and provide such
drainage structures to connect each building on each lot to the storm sewer
system as required by the City Engineer.
         G.   All storm drainage under pavement and at a point three feet
outside pavement shall be reinforced concrete tile or approved equal, and the
trench shall be backfilled with approved material (ODOT 603).
         H.   All storm sewer manholes shall be constructed to conform to the
State of Ohio, Department of Transportation Standard Drawings or the city
Standard Construction Drawings or an approved equal.
         I.   All catch basins shall be built of concrete cast-in-place or
precast concrete. Castings shall be Neenah R-3451 or an approved equal.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers.
         A.   Sanitary sewer facilities shall be designed and constructed by
the subdivider, as required for the area in which the proposed subdivision is
located, for the proper disposal of wastes for each lot.
         B.   If a subdivision can be reasonably and adequately served by the
extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, as determined by the City
Engineer, the subdivider shall provide a system of sanitary sewer mains and a
lateral connection for each lot in accordance with §
1248.03.
         C.   If a subdivision cannot be reasonably or adequately served by the
extension or an existing public sanitary sewer, as determined by the City
Engineer and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, then the City Division
of Health or the County Health Department, the City Engineer and the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency may permit the design and construction of a
temporary independent sanitary treatment plant providing complete treatment and
a house connection for each lot. The temporary treatment plant shall be
abandoned when public trunk sewers are installed in that area.
         D.   If individual sanitary sewer facilities must be installed, they
are to be on lots of a size as required by the City Division of Health, the
County Health Department and/or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency,
whichever has jurisdiction, provided that such requirements are established by
published statute, law or regulation duly enacted.
         E.   1.   Pretreatment of all industrial waste shall be as prescribed
by the city and will require approval by the city for discharge of the effluent
into a city sanitary or storm sewer system.
            2.   If effluent from a wastewater treatment plant is discharged
into any public watercourse, approval shall be obtained from the Ohio
Department of Health and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
      (3)   Water supply.
         A.   A water supply system shall be designed and constructed by the
subdivider, as required for the area in which the subdivision is located, and a
water tap provided for each lot.
         B.   Where public water supply is within reasonable distance, as
determined by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall construct a system of
water mains to connect with the public water supply and provide a water tap for
each lot.
         C.   If a subdivision cannot be reasonably served by the extension of
an existing public water supply, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency may
permit the installation of a community supply to serve each lot. The subdivider
must show reasonable proof that there is a dependable water source available
from which this supply can be drawn.
      (4)   Individual systems.  Where public or community water supply and
sanitary sewer facilities are not available, individual water wells and
sanitary disposal facilities shall be provided for each lot in the subdivision
if approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and the City Division
of Health or the County Health Department, whichever has jurisdiction.
   (g)   Flood plain.
      (1)   If any portion of the land within a proposed subdivision may be
subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm water, and/or if any portion is
within an area designated as flood prone, such fact and that portion shall be
clearly indicated on the subdivision plat, provided that the requirements are
established by published statute, law or regulation duly enacted.
      (2)   Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential
occupancy or for other such use which may increase the danger to health, life
or property, or which may aggravate the flood hazard.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
CHAPTER 1248:  IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
1248.01   Required improvements
   
1248.02   Monuments
   
1248.03   Street and utility improvements
   
1248.04   Public building sites, open space and parks
   
1248.05   Extra size and off-site improvements
   
1248.06   Construction requirements
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1248.01  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   The improvements required by this chapter shall be designed, furnished
and installed by the subdivider in accordance with the provisions of these
Regulations and other regulations of the state and city. The required
improvements shall be installed before a subdivision plat is approved, or, in
lieu thereof, financial guarantees for the installation shall be approved prior
to approval of a subdivision plat. The subdivider shall provide and install
within the proposed survey or subdivision the minimum improvements set forth in
Table 2.
TABLE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2970.jpg]
 
   (b)   Notes to
Table 2, Schedule of Required Improvements, are as follows:
   A.   Grading is required for lots, blocks and streets.
   B.   Pavement is required.  Specifications vary with classification of
street. Refer to §
1248.03.
   C.   Exceptions to this requirement may be made by the City Planning
Commission.
   D.   Trees shall not be planted in the right-of-way or in the utility
easement.
      1.   Exceptions to this requirement may be made by the City Planning
Commission if either one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   If no utilities are located or planned to be located underground
in the right-of-way.
         b.   If the City Utilities Department decides that the right-of-way is
of sufficient width so that trees can be planted where they will not interfere
with utility installation and maintenance.
      2.   When an exception is granted, the Secretary of the City Planning
Commission shall notify the Shade Tree Commission of the exception and the
Shade Tree Commission shall recommend the type of trees to be planted.
   E.   See §
1246.04(f)(2) and (f)(3) of these Regulations for exceptions.
   F.   A closed storm drainage system shall be required. Curb and gutter shall
be required on both sides of the street. Exceptions to this requirement may be
made by the City Planning Commission.
   G.   Street lights are required on business and industrial streets and at
intersections on all streets.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 1248.02  MONUMENTS.
   Monuments shall be placed and maintained on all block corners, angle points
and points of curves in streets, street intersections and lot corners. Such
monuments shall be in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4733.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1248.03  STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
   The improvement standards and specifications shall be as follows, except
that any variations or additional requirements from these specifications, which
may be required because of adverse site characteristics, will be determined by
the City Engineer. All materials and construction methods shall be in
accordance with the appropriate section of the current edition of the Ohio
Department of Transportation specifications, herein abbreviated as ODOT, and
Appendix 7, Standard Drawings. All streets and utility improvements, both
public and private, shall conform to these specifications:
   (a)   Streets and roads. See Table 1 in §
1246.04.
      (1)   Major and minor arterial thoroughfares. The type and thickness of
pavement will vary with design capacity, speed and loading. The developer will
be responsible only for curbs and gutters and a maximum of 31 feet of pavement
cost, as determined by the engineer of jurisdiction. Major and minor arterial
thoroughfares shall be constructed from plans furnished by the engineer of
jurisdiction and to the standards and specifications established therein.
      (2)   Collector, commercial and industrial streets.
         A.   The type and thickness of pavement shall be as follows:
            1.   Ten inches (ODOT 304) limestone base, bituminous prime and two
and one-half inches of (ODOT 448-2) asphaltic concrete base surface and one and
one-half inches of (ODOT 448-1) asphaltic concrete surface;
            2.   Four inches of (ODOT 304) limestone aggregate base, seven
inches of (ODOT 301) asphaltic concrete base and two inches of (ODOT 448-1)
asphaltic concrete surface;
            3.   Four inches of (ODOT 304) limestone, seven inches of (ODOT
452) portland concrete pavement designed to ODOT Pavement Design and
Rehabilitation Manual requirements.
         B.   Six inch underdrains (ODOT 605) shall be installed on both sides
of street for options A.1., A.2. and A.3.
      (3)   Local residential; cul-de-sacs.
         A.   The type and thickness of pavement shall be as follows:
            1.   Eight inches (ODOT 304) limestone base, bituminous prime and
two and one-half inches (ODOT 448-1) asphaltic concrete surface;
            2.   Four inches (ODOT 304) and six inches of (ODOT 301) bituminous
aggregate base and one and one-half inches of (ODOT 448-1) asphaltic concrete
surface;
            3.   Four inches (ODOT 304) limestone, six inches (ODOT 452)
portland concrete pavement designed to ODOT Pavement Design and Rehabilitation
Manual requirements.
         B.   Six inch underdrains (ODOT 605) shall be installed on both sides
of street for options A.1., A.2. and A.3.
      (4)   Pavement drainage.
         A.   Roadway ditches having a grade in excess of 2% shall have an
approved type gutter using concrete, stone, sod or underground drainage, with
sufficient inlet spaces at intervals.
         B.   All driveways where ditches are used shall be provided with a
drive pipe having a minimum diameter of 12 inches and being a minimum of 20
feet long, or at least eight feet longer than the width of the driveway. The
invert of the pipe shall be 18 inches below the centerline of the pavement
(C.M.P. or equal).
         C.   All street pavements shall slope from the crown to each gutter at
three-sixteenths of an inch per foot minimum.
         D.   The subdivider shall show the cross-sections and centerline
profile of all existing pavements and intersections and a profile at the stub
end for future extensions of pavement and drainage.
   (b)   Curbs and gutters. Integral curbs may be constructed with concrete
pavements. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed of portland cement (ODOT
609).
      (1)   Gutter plate minimum width: 18 inches; minimum thickness: eight and
one-half inches.
      (2)   Minimum curb height: six inches (front); 13 inches (back).
      (3)   Minimum curb width: six inches.
      (4)   Type of material: concrete (see Appendix 7, Standard Drawings).
   (c)   Driveways.
      (1)   Minimum width: 18 feet at curb and ten feet at sidewalk. Minimum
apron: four feet on each side of driveway.
      (2)   Type and thickness of base material: six inches plain concrete
(ODOT 452), five inches (ODOT 301) plus one inch (ODOT 404) or eight inches
(ODOT 304) plus two inches (ODOT 404) or equivalent.
   (d)   Sidewalks. Sidewalk provisions are specified in the required
improvements schedule set forth in §
1248.01, Table 2. Sidewalks shall be located two feet inside the street right-
of-way lines.
      (1)   Minimum width: five feet.
      (2)   Minimum thickness: four inches.
      (3)   Minimum thickness at driveways: six inches.
      (4)   Material: plain portland concrete (class C).
      (5)   Sidewalks shall be constructed pursuant to R.C. § 729.12 to provide
ramped curbing.
   (e)   Storm sewer systems. Storm sewer systems and other drainage
improvements shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of,
and subject to approval by, the City Engineer.
   (f)   Electric lines. In all subdivisions, electric current conductors may
be buried as per §
1246.04 and as per power supplier specifications. Above ground pads for
transformers will be permitted.
   (g)   Gas mains. Gas mains, when proposed, shall be installed in the green
belt between the sidewalk and the curb, with a minimum 30-inch cover. Service
lines shall be installed with a minimum 18-inch cover as per specifications of
Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc.  Locations are to be approved by City Engineer.
   (h)   Street name and traffic control signs. Street name signs (to be
provided by the developer) shall be installed at all intersections, and
traffic-control signs (to be provided by the city) shall conform to ODOT
standards.
      (1)   Minimum size of sign: six inches high, 18 inches long.
      (2)   Minimum height above ground: eight feet.
      (3)   Sign plates: sign plates shall conform to standards set forth by
the City Engineer.
      (4)   Posts: sign posts shall conform to standards set forth by the City
Engineer.
   (i)   Water supply.
      (1)   If the city water supply is not available, a water supply
distribution system, if required, shall be designed, located and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
and city regulations.
      (2)   The following minimum standards and specifications shall apply:
         A.   Main size: eight inches in diameter (minimum).
         B.   Waterline material shall be as follows:
            1.   Ductile case iron water main specifications, ANSI-A21.52,
Class 2, including mechanical joint fitting (AWWA-specification C153).
            2.   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) water main specifications AWWA/ANSI
C900 DR18, including mechanical joint fitting (AWWA-specification C153).
         C.   Fire hydrants shall be installed as follows:
            1.   Location: At each intersection and a maximum distance of 500
feet between hydrants.
            2.   Type of hydrant: city standard, with a six-inch gate valve on
hydrant lead, per specification AWWA-C502.
         D.   Valves: 16-inch and larger: butterfly type; smaller than 16-inch:
gate type.
         E.   Depth: four and one-half foot cover over water main (minimum).
         F.   Tap: One required for each residence as follows:
            1.    Three-quarter inch diameter, Type K copper, 160 pounds per
square inch rating, ASTM D-2737, known as service pipe or municipal pipe that
can be flared for use with compression fittings, or other equivalent material
approved by the City Engineer.
            2.    Three-quarter inch corporation stop.
            3.    Three-quarter inch curb stop and box located at the right-of-
way.
            4.   a.   All waterlines shall be constructed in a continuous loop
system meeting city and Ohio EPA regulations and specifications by connecting
to new or existing water lines so that no line shall be a dead end; or
               b.   The developer must provide plans and calculations certified
by an Ohio registered engineer demonstrating that the proposed extension will
cause no decrease of flow or pressure for both domestic and fire flow supply
situations from the point of the last documented continuous looping in the
existing city's distribution system. Proposed plans must meet City of Shelby
and Ohio EPA regulations and specifications.
               c.   In either case, plans and calculations must be approved by
the Deputy Director of Public Services (Utilities Director), Water
Superintendent and City Engineer.
            5.   Larger taps shall be approved by the Water Division and
installed at the expense of the developer.
   (j)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   If the city sanitary sewer is not available, a sanitary sewer
collection system, if required, shall be designed, located and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
and city regulations.
      (2)   The following minimum standards and specifications shall apply:
         A.   Main size: eight-inch diameter.
         B.   Material: PVC pipe, current ASTM C-425.
         C.   Pipe joints: premium current ASTM C-425.
         D.   House tap: one required for each lot to the right-of-way line, as
follows:
            1.   Six-inch diameter minimum.
            2.   Installed by a "T" or "Y" connection method.
         E.   Manholes:
            1.   Wall sections: four-foot minimum diameter precast concrete,
ASTM Designation C-478;
            2.   Joints between sections: ASTM Designation C-443;
            3.   Frame and cover: as approved by the City Engineer, or other
approved equivalent;
            4.   Maximum distance between manholes: 400 feet (see Appendix 7,
Standard Drawings).
   (k)   Testing of water and sewer lines. Testing of water lines and sanitary
sewer lines after installation shall be done by the subdivider in accordance
with the procedures and requirements of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 15-2004,
passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 14-2005, passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 13-2019, passed 7-15-
2019)
§ 1248.04  PUBLIC BUILDING SITES, OPEN SPACE AND PARKS.
   (a)   Public building sites.
      (1)   At the preliminary plan stage, the City Planning Commission shall
notify governmental and public agencies and the political subdivision having
jurisdiction within the area to be platted that a subdivision is being
proposed. The City Planning Commission shall designate a period of 21 days
within which such agencies and political subdivision shall determine if land
within the subdivision is required for their use as a public building site and
so advise the City Planning Commission in writing of the proposed use and the
area required. If, within the designated time, this requirement is deemed to
exist, the subdivider shall be notified during the preliminary plan stage.
      (2)   If there is no response from an agency or political subdivision
within the designated time, then the preliminary plan stage shall continue
without further consideration of the sites.
      (3)   If an agency or political subdivision responds with a need for land
within the designated time, then the City Planning Commission shall forthwith
assist with negotiations for the same between the subdivider and the agency or
political subdivision in this regard, and sites shall be available to the
requesting entity by one of the following methods:
         A.   Statutory dedication without compensation to the subdivider;
         B.   Statutory dedication with reasonable compensation to the
subdivider;
         C.   Appropriation by the agency or political subdivision (eminent
domain);
         D.   Reservation by the appropriate legal instrument for acquisition
of a defined area by the governmental agency having authority to accept,
develop and maintain the same for the specific use for a period of one year
after the approval or the preliminary plan or for such additional time as may
be mutually negotiated. The reservation shall provide for the specific release
of the land from these requirements, reverting full legal title to the
subdivider or his or her successors or assigns if the agency or political
subdivision has not obtained a contract to acquire the land or has not filed
appropriate proceedings within the one-year limitation; or
         E.   Any other method arrived at by mutual agreement.
      (4)   Failure of the City Planning Commission to notify an agency or
political subdivision under division (a)(1) hereof shall not create any rights
in such body and shall have the same effect as making no response after being
notified and shall not make defective the subsequent subdivision proceedings
hereunder.
   (b)   Open space and parks.
      (1)   There shall be no requirements for a subdivider to provide parks or
other open space except as required or specified in applicable zoning
regulations or by the Open Space Plan adopted by the City Planning Commission.
      (2)   When a governmental agency (city, village, county or township)
having jurisdiction over the land proposed to be subdivided, which land is not
designated for open space or parks pursuant to the City Planning Commission
Open Space Plan or applicable zoning regulations, desires land within the
subdivision for that use, then the governmental agency, within the time
designated in the notice under division (a)(1) hereof, shall notify the
subdivider through the City Planning Commission.
      (3)   The governmental agency desiring such land shall specify the
quantity, description, location and use (passive or active) of the land so
desired and designate the public entity that would be responsible for the
development and maintenance of the use and the expense thereof.
      (4)   If a governmental agency specifies its desire, as set forth in
division (b)(3) hereof, then the City Planning Commission shall forthwith
assist with negotiations for the same between the subdivider and the
governmental agency and land shall be available by one of the following
methods:
         A.   Statutory dedication, without compensation to the subdivider, to
the governmental agency qualified to accept the same and to maintain and
develop the land;
         B.   Statutory dedication, with reasonable compensation to the
subdivider, to the governmental agency qualified to accept the same and to
maintain and develop the land;
         C.   Reservation by the appropriate legal instrument for acquisition
of a defined area by the governmental agency having authority to accept,
develop and maintain the same for the specific use for a period of one year
after the approval of the preliminary plan. The reservation shall provide for
the specific release of the land from these requirements, reverting legal title
to the subdivider or his or her successors or assigns if the governmental
agency so authorized has not obtained a contract proceeding within the one-year
limitation;
         D.   Any other method arrived at by mutual agreement, including the
reservation or grant of land by private deed or covenant for the use of the
property owners, with provision being made for the development and maintenance
thereof;
         E.   The governmental agency may encourage open space subdivisions
wherein private property owners, through the use of a homeowners' association,
will conserve and maintain open space and recreation areas for the private use
of property owners within the subdivision (see §
1250.06);
         F.   Failure of the City Planning Commission to notify a governmental
agency under division (b)(2) hereof shall not create any rights in such agency
and shall have the same effect as making no response after being notified and
shall not make defective the subsequent subdivision proceedings hereunder; or
         G.   Any reservation of property for a period of one year, referred to
above, shall be null and void if the subdivision plat of which it is part does
not receive final approval or is withdrawn by the subdivider before final
approval.  It is the intent of this division not to create a burden on the land
if it is not to be subdivided.  Any legal instrument creating such a
reservation shall state this intent.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1248.05  EXTRA SIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   When streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed
subdivision, thereby necessitating off-site extensions or improvement of
streets or utilities, and when extra size (greater in size than is required to
serve the proposed subdivision) utility lines and streets are required for the
proper future growth of an area, the City Planning Commission may require, as a
condition precedent to approval of a preliminary plan and subdivision plat
assurances that such off-site extensions and extra size improvements will be
provided in accordance with the following:
   (a)   Utility extensions from the proposed subdivision shall be installed
and constructed in such a location, manner and size as to make their extension
usable in accordance with governmental regulations for servicing adjacent
areas, and, with reference to drainage utilities, the adjacent area shall
include the downstream area of the particular drainage district and the uphill
drainage and extra size line as determined by reasonable engineering standards.
   (b)   If the City Planning Commission, in conjunction with the applicable
political subdivision having control of the area, finds that off-site
extensions require crossing undeveloped lands and that a special assessment
would not be guaranteed against such lands until some future time, or if a
governmental expenditure for such purpose is not then warranted, and if this
same condition exists on extra size facilities which will later benefit and
enhance other property, then the developer may be required, as a condition of
approval, to obtain all necessary easements or rights-of-way.  Improvements so
constructed shall be dedicated and granted to the public and not maintained
under private ownership. All such improvements shall be available for
connections by developers of adjoining lands.
   (c)   (1)   To provide for reimbursement to the developer for the costs of
the installation of off-site extensions and extra size facilities (such costs
to include construction costs, all engineering costs properly allocated
thereto, all costs for legal services allocated thereto, and any other costs
necessary and proper in determining the entire cost of the improvement),
contractual arrangements shall be made between the applicable political
subdivision and the developer, to be approved by the City Engineer, setting
forth the total amount of such reimbursement, together with a pro-rata usage
reimbursement plan, including the nature and method of determining the amount
of such reimbursement and the time or times at which the same shall occur. 
Such contractual arrangements shall be accomplished and completed prior to the
improvements being started.  It is the intent of this section to secure
reimbursement to the developer at such time or times as connections to the off-
site improvements are made and extra size facilities are used by developers of
adjoining or benefitting lands.
      (2)   As future development occurs on adjoining or benefitting lands, the
original developer shall be reimbursed in accordance with the contractual
arrangements referred to above and each successive developer shall exhibit to
the City Planning Commission a receipt showing reimbursement prior to final
subdivision approval relating to such adjoining or benefitting lands.
   (d)   The governmental body having jurisdiction may construct and pay for
the off-site extensions and extra size facilities, assess the costs to the
owners who benefitted and require a deposit from the developer as described in
§
1248.06(d)(1). The governmental body having jurisdiction may establish a rotary
fund to pay the development costs and not collect assessments on the
intervening land until it is developed.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1248.06  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Preconstruction meeting.  Prior to the construction of any project
involving the City Engineer, a preconstruction meeting shall be held between
the subdivider and the City Engineer. At this time, the project shall be
discussed in regard to procedure, materials and inspection.
   (b)   Inspections.
      (1)   Responsible official.  The City Engineer or his or her
representative shall be responsible for the inspection of all street
improvements, including storm sewers. The County Sanitary Engineer or his or
her representative, the City Health Commissioner, the County Health Department,
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, whoever or whichever has
jurisdiction, shall be responsible for home sewage disposal systems, sanitary
sewers and water lines.
      (2)   Authority and duties of City Engineer.
         A.   The City Engineer or his or her representative shall be
authorized to inspect the construction of all improvements and all materials
furnished.  Such inspection may extend to all or any part of the improvements
and to the preparation, fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be
used.  The City Engineer, the City Health Commissioner and/or the County
Sanitary Engineer shall designate an inspector and the inspector shall not be
authorized to revoke, alter or waive any requirement of the improvement
specifications or plans.  He or she shall be authorized to call the attention
of the contractor to any failure of the work or materials to conform to the
improvement specifications and contract. He or she shall have the authority to
reject materials which do not meet specification requirements or to suspend the
portion of the work involved.
         B.   Periodic inspection during the installation of improvements shall
be made by the City Engineer, the City Health Commissioner and/or the Sanitary
Engineer, to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications as
provided in the subdivider's construction agreement.
      (3)   Final inspection.  Upon completion of all improvements, the
subdivider shall request, in writing, a final inspection by the City Engineer,
the City Health Commissioner and/or the Sanitary Engineer as required under
R.C. § 711.091.  The Engineer shall make a final inspection of all street,
storm and sanitary sewer and water improvements.
   (c)   Responsibilities of subdivider and/or contractor.
      (1)   Cooperation of subdivider and/or contractor.  The subdivider shall
have available on the project, at all times, two copies of all approved
improvement plans and specifications. He or she shall cooperate with the City
Engineer and with other contractors in every way possible. The subdivider shall
at all times have a competent superintendent acting as his or her agent on the
project. The superintendent shall be capable of reading and thoroughly
understanding the improvement plans and specifications, and he or she shall
receive instructions from the inspector. The City Engineer's orders shall be
executed without delay.
      (2)   Repair of damaged improvements.  Any damage done to improvements by
construction traffic or by any other means shall be repaired, or the damaged
materials replaced, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer before the next
item of construction is begun.
      (3)   Maintenance of improvements.  The subdivider shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the improvements installed and shall be responsible for
providing the services necessary to guarantee access to all occupied lots,
including plowing snow, until final acceptance by the city. The subdivider
shall be given adequate notice by the City Engineer of the need for the
maintenance or service. If the subdivider fails to perform such necessary
maintenance or service within 30 days from the date the notice was issued by
the City Engineer, the city may perform the service and bill the subdivider for
the service. Payment shall be guaranteed by the performance bond.
      (4)   Maintenance of private streets. 
         A.   The maintenance and repair of private streets shall not be the
responsibility of the public. If private streets are a part of a plat, then the
developer or persons seeking approval of the plat shall, prior to the approval,
provide such protective covenants, easements and documents to be recorded
providing for the ownership, maintenance, repair and financing of the same and
establishing responsibility.
         B.   In the event the owner or owners established to own, maintain,
repair and finance such private streets shall, at any time after the
establishment of the same, fail to maintain the same in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the plan, or permit it to deteriorate so as to
constitute a public nuisance, then the governmental unit having jurisdiction
over the same may serve written notice upon the owner or owners setting forth
the manner in which the failure has occurred. The notice shall include a demand
that the deficiencies be corrected within 30 days thereof and shall state the
place and date of the hearing thereon before the governmental unit, to be held
within 15 days after the notice. At the hearing, the governmental unit may
modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they may be corrected. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof are not corrected
within those 30 days or any extension thereof, the governmental unit, in order
to prevent further deterioration or to abate the public nuisance, may enter
upon the street in question and maintain the same until the owner established
for that purpose resumes his or her responsibility. The entry, maintenance and
abatement shall not vest in the governmental unit any rights to the streets or
roadways for any purpose, nor shall the entity constitute a dedication. To
provide for the cost of the maintenance and abatement by the governmental unit,
the developer or the owner established to own the streets shall, simultaneously
with the execution of the plat, grant to the governmental unit a conservation
easement vesting in the governmental unit all of the rights necessary to carry
out the terms of this section, as well as all of the rights of the developer or
the owner to collect dues or assessments from property owners within the
development, which dues and assessments, or a reasonable substitution therefor,
for the maintenance and repair of the streets, shall be an obligation upon the
property owners by virtue of the conservation easement or recorded protective
covenants, as well as any articles of incorporation or bylaws of any
homeowners' association formed to hold title to the streets.
   (d)   Approval of completion of improvements guarantee.
      (1)   Assurance of completion of improvements. 
         A.   No lot, proposed lot or parcel of land which is subject to these
Regulations shall be sold or leased, nor shall a building permit be issued for
the construction of a building on the lot or parcel of land, until the
improvements required by these Regulations, or assurance of their completion,
have been completed. The assurance of completion of improvements shall be
satisfied by the furnishing of a performance bond or surety bond or other
guarantee or security approved by the City Law Director.
         B.   When the performance bond or other guarantee and assurance of
completion of improvements have been satisfied, the city, if requested by the
subdivider, shall provide a written document accepting the improvements for
ownership and for future maintenance.
      (2)   Reduction of bond. 
         A.   The developer shall give written notice to the City Engineer when
improvements covered by bond or other guarantee have been completed. The City
Engineer or designee shall then make any and all inspections essential to the
determination that the improvements conform to all standards of these
Regulations, and he or she shall, within 14 days of receiving the heretofore
described written notice, convey a written report to the Mayor and the
developer, stating his or her approval or disapproval, as the case may be. In
the event the City Engineer or designee disapproves, he or she shall state his
or her reasons for doing so in a written report to both parties.
         B.   Upon approval of the improvements, the performance bond or surety
bond shall be replaced by a maintenance bond equal to 10% of the performance
bond or other agreement for a duration of one year. The bond will be released
after final inspection and acceptance.
      (3)   Liability and property damage insurance.  The subdivider shall
furnish evidence of liability insurance in the amount of $500,000 for bodily
injury for any one person; $1,000,000 for bodily injury in the aggregate for
any one occurrence; and $500,000 for property damage for any one occurrence;
provided that if a single limit policy is offered, the amount of insurance
shall be $1,000,000, which shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any
and all liability arising by reason of the condition of the streets of the
subdivision or out of the construction or installation of all such
improvements. A copy of the insurance policy shall remain at all times with the
City Law Director and a certificate of insurance with the City Finance
Director.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
CHAPTER 1250:  OPEN SPACE AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
1250.01   In general
   
1250.02   General features
   
1250.03   Conformity of development to Subdivision Regulations
   
1250.04   Public streets
   
1250.05   Staging of residential planned development
   
1250.06   Common open space guarantee
   
1250.07   Staging of nonresidential construction
   
1250.08   Condominiums
Cross-reference:
   Calculation of open space requirements, see §
1296.09
   Open space design standards, see §
1246.04
   Planned Unit Development Districts, see §
1266.02
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Lots outside municipal boundaries, see R.C. §§ 711.24 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Street dedication and acceptance, see R.C. § 723.03
   Vacating or altering plats on application of owner, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et
seq.
§ 1250.01  IN GENERAL.
   Planned unit developments are separate entities with a distinct character
which are intended to be in harmony with surrounding developments. Projects
which are designed solely to circumvent these Regulations or applicable zoning
regulations shall not be approved. The project must clearly demonstrate that
natural features are being preserved, that amenities are being provided which
would enhance the liveability of the project and that such attributes of the
project could not be achieved with strict adherence to these Regulations. A
minimum of 50 acres is suggested for a planned unit development to allow
sufficient flexibility and imaginative design.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.02  GENERAL FEATURES.
   A major element of the planned unit development is privately owned or
publicly owned common property within the development. These developments
usually contain such features as an internal park network abutting home sites,
recreational facilities, and preservation of natural amenities. A homeowners'
association should be established to provide for the maintenance of all
properties held in common.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.03  CONFORMITY OF DEVELOPMENT TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   Whenever a planned unit development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the standards contained in these Regulations shall
be applicable. If a planned unit development abuts or contains an existing
minor residential street, it must meet the requirements of these Regulations.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.04  PUBLIC STREETS.
   The City Planning Commission may require certain streets within planned unit
developments to be public if it determines that the project density
necessitates the use of public streets and that traffic connections to adjacent
plats or developments are required for adequate circulation.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.05  STAGING OF RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
   Each stage of a planned unit development must be so designated as to stand
independently of future related stages in the event future stages are not
constructed. The construction and provision of all of the common open spaces
and public and recreational facilities, which are shown on the final
development plan, must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling
units. The City Planning Commission shall not approve the final development
plan for any stage of the planned unit development unless the average of the
allowable dwelling units per stage, up to and including the stage which is to
be approved, does not exceed, by more than 10%, the average number of dwelling
units per stage which is allowable for the entire planned unit development.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.06  COMMON OPEN SPACE GUARANTEE.
   (a)   Common open space, privately owned, shall require provisions for
maintenance and the financing of such maintenance to ensure its continuity,
conservation, maintenance and preservation in order to prevent its diversion
and deterioration in the manner hereinafter set forth. Publicly owned common
open space shall be the responsibility of the governmental entity approving and
accepting the same on the plat.
   (b)   If privately owned common property is a part of the plan, then the
developer shall establish an open space development plan which shall include
such plats, agreements, protective covenants, easements and documents to be
recorded providing for the ownership, maintenance and financing of such
maintenance for the common open space, together with the documents establishing
a homeowners' association for the maintenance of all properties held in common.
   (c)   In the event that the owner established to own, develop and maintain
the common open space, or any successor, shall, at any time after the
establishment of the open space development, fail to maintain the common open
space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the plan, or permit
it to deteriorate so as to constitute a public nuisance, then the governmental
unit having jurisdiction over the same (hereinafter called "governmental unit")
may serve written notice upon such owner or upon the residents of the open
space development area setting forth the manner in which the owner has failed
to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition or has permitted a
public nuisance to develop. Such notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies be corrected within 30 days thereof and shall state the date and
place of hearing thereon before the governmental unit, to be held within 15
days after the notice. At such hearing the governmental unit may modify the
terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in
the original notice or in the modifications thereof are not corrected within
the 30 days or any extension thereof, the governmental unit, in order to
prevent further deterioration or to abate the public nuisance, may enter upon
the common open space and maintain the same until the owner established for
such purpose resumes his or her responsibility. Such entry, maintenance and
abatement upon the common open space shall not vest in the governmental unit
any rights to use the common open space for any other purpose, nor shall such
entry constitute a dedication.
   (d)   To provide for the costs of such maintenance and abatement by the
governmental unit, the developer or the owner established to own the common
open space shall, simultaneously with the execution of the unit plan, grant to
the governmental unit a conservation easement vesting in the governmental unit
all of the rights necessary to carry out the terms of this section, as well as
all of the rights of the developer or the owner of the open space to collect
dues or assessments from the property owners within the development, which dues
and assessments, or a reasonable substitution therefor, for the maintenance of
the common open space, shall be an obligation upon the property owners by
virtue of such conservation easement or recorded protective covenants, as well
as any articles of incorporation or bylaws of any homeowners' association to
hold title to the common open space. 
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.07  STAGING OF NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   If a planned unit development contains nonresidential uses, these uses may
be constructed first, but only if the City Planning Commission finds, and
records its finding on the final development plan, that the nonresidential uses
are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the community even though the
residential area of the planned unit development is not built or not completed.
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
§ 1250.08  CONDOMINIUMS.
   R.C. Chapter 5311 provides for the recording of ownership of condominiums.
Condominium ownership does not excuse compliance with these Regulations
whenever appropriate. 
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
SUBDIVISION APPENDICES
Appendix
   
I.   Three-Mile Limit for Subdivision Regulations
   
II.   Major and Minor Subdivision Charts
   
III.   Typical Preliminary Subdivision Plat
   
IV.   Typical Final Subdivision Plat
   
V.   Open Space and Thoroughfare Plan
   
VI.   Parks and Transportation Plan
   
VII.   Sample Forms
APPENDIX I:  THREE-MILE LIMIT FOR SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2973.jpg]
 
APPENDIX II:  MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISION CHARTS
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
   Regulates the division of land, its planning and development into what is
known as a subdivision:
      §
1244.02   Minor Subdivisions
      §
1244.03   Major Subdivisions
   However, land divided under certain specifications or conditions is not
classified as a subdivision and, therefore, the regulations of §§
1244.02 and
1244.03 do not apply.
   (a)   DIVISION OF LAND THAT IS A SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   When a parcel of land shown as a unit or contiguous units on the
last preceding tax rule is divided into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any
one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose, now or in the future, of
transfer of ownership.
      (2)   Improvement of one or more parcels for residential and commercial
or industrial structures involving the allocation of land for opening, widening
or extending streets, except private streets for industrial structures.
      (3)   Division or allocation of land open spaces, for owners', occupants'
or tenants' common use, or as easements for public sewer, water, storm drainage
or other public facilities.
   (b)   DIVISION OF LAND THAT IS NOT A SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   Some divisions of land are not subdivisions.
      (2)   If a division of land is not a subdivision, then these Regulations
do not apply and no plat is required.
      (3)   The following divisions are not subdivisions:
         (a)   Division of a parcel into two or more parcels, all of which are
five acres or more, not involving new streets (public or private) or easements
of access;
         (b)   Sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining landowners, if no
additional building sites are created;
         (c)   Transfer of an existing piece of land as a whole that has been
previously recorded by a metes and bounds description; and
         (d)   Normally, the transfer of a lot that is recorded as a lot in a
major subdivision.  The transfer of a part of such a lot will not be a
subdivision, unless it is less than five acres and involves new streets (public
or private) or easements of access, or unless it creates additional building
sites and is not a sale or exchange between adjoining landowners.
      (4)   If the land to be divided is a subdivision, then the owners will
have to proceed with formal platting requirements in §
1244.03, for major subdivisions, unless the division of land meets the minor
subdivision requirements in §
1244.02 (R.C. § 711.131).
      (5)   If the criteria for a minor subdivision are met, then no plat is
required by the City Planning Commission.  However, City Charter, §
98, requires a plat for any subdivision.
      (6)   If the criteria for a minor subdivision are not met, then the major
subdivision requirements must be followed, unless a hardship exists to qualify
for a variance.
   (c)   WHAT IS A MINOR SUBDIVISION?
      (1)   A.   It is a division of land that:
            1.   Must be a division of a parcel along an existing public
street;
            2.   Must not involve the opening, widening or extension of any
street or road;
            3.   Must involve no more than five lots after the original tract
has been completely subdivided; and
            4.   Must not be contrary to applicable platting, subdividing or
zoning regulations.
         B.   Ohio R.C. 711.131 sets forth other requirements to be met by a
minor subdivision.
      (2)   Keep these definitions in mind:
         A.   The full definition of a minor subdivision (above).
         B.   Original tract:  A contiguous quantity of land held by one person
or in common ownership, which land has not been platted by the existing owner. 
This means:
            1.   A tract can be original to one person and not to another.
            2.   "Original" does not mean initial source.
            3.   Subdivision through successive ownership is permitted.
(Based on O.A.G. Opinion 71-083)
      (3)   Completely subdivided:  A tract that is divided into as many lots
as the subdivider intends for the tract.
         A.   A specific subdivider may later decide to increase the number of
lots in a subdivision, but to do so, assuming there are more than five lots as
a result, it would be necessary to replat the original tract.
         B.   It is possible for a tract to be "completely subdivided" and then
be further subdivided by a party who purchases or takes title to a parcel in a
subdivision large enough to be divided.
      (4)   The Ohio Attorney General has concluded:
         A.   "Tract" means a contiguous quantity of land undivided by lot
lines.
         B.   "Original" means a tract which has not been divided under its
present ownership.
         C.   "Original tract" means a contiguous quantity of land held by one
person or in common, which land has not been platted by the existing owner.
         D.   The phrase "involving no more than five lots after the original
tract has been completely subdivided" applies only to the necessity for
replatting to accomplish changes in an already subdivided tract.
   EXAMPLES:
      Example A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2976.jpg]
 
      Example B.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2979.jpg]
 
   1.   A owns 20 acres and sells four acres to B. (minor subdivision)
   2.   B divides the four acres into five lots.
      a.   Subdvision - Yes
      b.   Minor Subdivision - Yes
      c.   B is the original tract - not the A
      Example C.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2982.jpg]
 
   1.   A owns 121 acres and sells as follows:
      a.   1963 - 14 acres
      b.   1964 - 19 acres
      c.   1966 - 28 acres
      d.   1969 - 44 acres
      (none of these is a subdivision) each owner
   2.   A kept 15 acres and in 1972 wanted to sell off 1 acre from the 15-acre
parcel.
      a.   A subdivision - yes
      b.   Is it a minor subdivision? Does it involved no more than five lots
after the "original tract" has been "completely subdivided?" What is the
"original tract" - 15 acres or 121 acres?
      c.   This would be a minor subdivision and 15 acres is the original
tract.
      Example D.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2985.jpg]
 
   1.   A owns 120 acres and sells 30 acres to B.
   2.   B divides the 30 acres into four lots (not a subdivision unless one or
more is less than five acres. If so, then it is a minor subdivision.
   3.   B sells Lot No. 1 and keeps Lot No. 2, 3 and 4.
   4.   B then divides Lot Nos. 2, 3 and 4 each in half creating six new lots
of 3.75 acres each. (This is a major subdvision.)
      Example E.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2988.jpg]
 
   1.   A owns five acres and divides it into five parcels, the largest of
which is 2-1/2 acres.
      (A minor subdivision)
   2.   A sells the 2-1/2 acre parcel to B.
   3.   B then divides the 2-1/2 acres into five 1/2-acre parcels. 
      a.   Is this a minor or a major subdivision? Minor.
      b.   What is the original tract? The 2-1/2 acres, not the five acres.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2991.jpg]
 
APPENDIX III:  TYPICAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2994.jpg]
 
APPENDIX IV:  TYPICAL FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2997.jpg]
 
APPENDIX V:  OPEN SPACE AND THOROUGHFARE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3000.jpg]
 
APPENDIX VI:  PARKS AND TRANSPORTATION PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3003.jpg]
 
APPENDIX VII:  SAMPLE FORMS
Click_here_to_see_the_forms_in_a_PDF_document.
FORM NO. 1
PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST
Date                                                             Application
Number                                                         
Subdivision                                                                   
                                                                     
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform to the requirements of the
Shelby Subdivision Regulations.  Those items not conforming are explained on
the final page.
   Does   Does Not   Item
1.                             Name of subdivision (no duplication permitted)
2.                             Description of location
3.                             Name and address of owner, subdivider, surveyor
and engineer
4.                             Sheet size not larger than 24" x 36" (index
sheet, if more than 1 sheet)
5.                             Proper scale
6.                             Date and north point
7.                             Vicinity map
8.                             Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners
9.                             Zoning classification of all major parcels and
proposed changes
10.                             Topography at 2' intervals
11.                             Location, width and names of existing streets,
rights of ways and easements
12.                             Location and dimensions of existing buildings
and parks
13.                             Corporation, township, range and section lines
14.                             Location of existing utilities, including
sewers, water lines and communication lines or poles
15.                             Layout, names and widths of proposed streets or
easements and proper dedications
16.                             Layout and approximate dimensions of all lots
17.                             Building setback lines
18.                             Survey monuments of adjacent properties
19.                             Parks and open spaces and proper dedications
20.                             Proposed use of lots
21.                             Copy of proposed deed restrictions, if any
22.                             Sewage treatment and percolation test results
23.                             Adequate preliminary improvement plans
24.                             Construction estimates
25.                             Required certifications
Date                                                                           
                                               
            Title or Position
                                                                               
                     
            Signature
FORM NO. 2
FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST
Date                                                             Application
Number                                                         
Subdivision                                                                   
                                                                     
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform to the requirements of the
Shelby Subdivision Regulations.  Those items not conforming are explained on
the final page.
   Does   Does Not   Item
1.                             Submitted within 12 months of preliminary
approval
2.                             Conform to preliminary plat and incorporates
suggested changes
3.                             Name of subdivision
4.                             Proper scale
5.                             Date and north point
6.                             Description of location
7.                             Sheet size not larger than 24" x 36" (index
sheet, if more than 1 sheet)
8.                             Name and address of owner, surveyor and engineer
9.                             Accurate survey data; seconds; linear dimensions
to hundredths of feet; radii; internal angles; points of curvature; tangent
bearing; lengths of arcs; lengths and bearings of chords
10.                             Closure
11.                             Bearings and distances to permanent monuments
12.                             Name, location, width and centerline of streets
13.                             Lot numbers and dimensions
14.                             Location and description of monuments
15.                             Building setback lines
16.                             Parks and open spaces and proper dedications
17.                             Final deed restriction
18.                             Final improvement plans
19.                             Installation or guarantee of installation of
improvements
20.                             Required final certifications
Date                                                                           
                                               
            Title or Position
                                                                               
                     
            Signature
FORM NO. 3
TECHNICAL DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT CHECKLIST
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform to or does not apply (NA) to the
requirements of Chapters 1246 and 1248 of the Shelby Subdivision Regulations. 
Those items not conforming are explained on the final page.
   Does   Does Not   NA      Item
                        GENERAL
1.                                        Conformity with Major Street Plan
2.                                        Conformity with zoning regulations,
or if no zoning, § 1246.04(d) applies
3.                                        Not located in flood plain
4.                                        Acceptable natural drainage and
erosion control
5.                                        Steep slopes not limiting factor
6.                                        Large trees and other significant
natural features
7.                                        Area of historical or cultural
significance
                        STREETS
8.                                        Right-of-way widths
9.                                        Pavement widths
10.                                        Radius of curvature
11.                                        Horizontal visibility
12.                                        Vertical alignment and visibility
13.                                        Grades
14.                                        Cul-de-sacs
15.                                        Turn-around radius - ROW - and
pavement
16.                                        Dead-end streets
17.                                        Dedication and addition of half
streets
18.                                        Marginal access streets, points of
access and planting strips
19.                                        Alleys
20.                                        Alignment of intersections
21.                                        Spacing of intersection relative to
different road classifications
22.                                        Avoidance of multiple intersections
23.                                        Avoidance of 4-way intersections
24.                                        Pavement and ROW of intersections
25.                                        Streets for commercial subdivisions
26.                                        Provisions for repair of pavement
27.                                        Streets for industrial subdivision
28.                                        Length of blocks
29.                                        Crosswalks
30.                                        Street monuments
31.                                        Subgrade
32.                                        Base course
33.                                        Surface course
34.                                        Curbs and gutters
35.                                        Bridges
36.                                        Sidewalks
37.                                        Street names and numbers, signs
   Does   Does Not   NA   Item
                        LOTS
38.                                        Size
39.                                        Setback lines
40.                                        Corner lot size
41.                                        Avoidance of double frontage lots
42.                                        Driveway culverts and grade
43.                                        Monuments
44.                                        Grading plan
45.                                        Parks and open spaces
46.                                        Type of water supply
47.                                        Test wells
48.                                        Type of sewage treatment
49.                                        Percolation test results
50.                                        Storm drainage system type
51.                                        Manholes
52.                                        Catch basins
53.                                        Headwalls
54.                                        Sufficient easements for utilities
or open drainage
55.                                        Other utilities
56.                                        Underground utilities
Date                                                                           
                                               
            Title or Position
                                                                               
                     
            Signature
FORM NO. 4
APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   Shelby, Ohio
Date                                                                Application
Number                                                    
1.   Name of applicant                                                        
                                                               
   Address                                                                     
                                                                   
   Phone                                                                      
                                                                 
2.   Name of surveyor or engineer                                              
                                                         
   Address                                                                     
                                                                   
   Phone                                                                       
                                                                 
3.   Name of subdivision                                                      
                                                               
4.   Description of location:   Section                                 
      Township                              
                     Range                                     Other           
                     
   (In addition, please attach copy of legal description)
5.   Proposed use                                                              
                                                                 
6.   Present zoning district                                                   
                                                                 
7.   Proposed zoning changes                                                   
                                                           
8.   Number of lots                    Area of parcel                          
                                                         
9.   Do you propose deed restriction?   Yes                    No             
     
   (If yes, please attach a copy)
10.   What type of sewage disposal do you propose?                             
                                                   
If an "on lot" type of sewage disposal is proposed, include a letter from the
City and/or County Board of Health approving a specific type of sewage
disposal.
11.   List all proposed improvements and utilities and state your intention to
install or post a guarantee prior to actual installation.
      Improvement      Installation      Guarantee
   a.                                                                          
                       
   b.                                                                          
                       
   c.                                                                          
                       
   d.                                                                          
                       
   e.                                                                          
                       
   f.                                                                          
                       
12.   List other materials submitted with this application
      Item                               No.     
   a.                                                                          
                                                    
   b.                                                                          
                                                    
   c.                                                                          
                                                    
   d.                                                                          
                                                    
   e.                                                                          
                                                    
   f.                                                                          
                                                    
Applicant                                    Surveyor or Engineer              
                                                         
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
   For Official Use
Date received                                                                  
                                                                   
Date of meeting of City Planning Commission                                    
                                                     
Action of City Planning Commission                                            
                                                         
If plat rejected, reason(s) for rejection                                      
                                                             
Date                                                                           
                                                                     
               Chairperson
FORM NO. 5
APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
   Shelby, Ohio
Date                                                                Application
Number                                                    
1.   Name of applicant                                                        
                                                               
   Address                                                                     
                                                                   
   Phone                                                                      
                                                                 
2.   Name of surveyor or engineer                                              
                                                         
   Address                                                                     
                                                                   
   Phone                                                                       
                                                                 
3.   Name of subdivision                                                      
                                                               
4.   Date preliminary plat approved                                           
                                                           
5.   Was a zoning change requested?   Yes                                No    
                         
6.   If yes, the plat may not be approved until it conforms to local zoning. 
Include a certification of zoning compliance if a change is requested.
7.   Have all required improvements been installed?    Yes                    
           No                               
If no, include detailed estimates of cost and a statement relative to the
method of improvement guarantee.  All estimates must be approved by the
responsible city official.
8.   Do you propose deed restrictions?  Yes                            
   No                                        
   (If yes, please attach a final copy.)
9.   List other materials submitted with this application.
      Item               No.
   a.                                                                          
                               
   b.                                                                          
                               
   c.                                                                          
                               
   d.                                                                          
                               
   e.                                                                          
                               
   f.                                                                          
                               
   g.                                                                          
                               
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
   For Official Use
Date received                                                                  
                                                                   
Date of meeting of City Planning Commission                                    
                                                     
Plat fee $                                                      
      Inspection fee $                                                        
 
Action by City Planning Commission                                            
                                                       
If plat rejected, reason(s) for rejection                                      
                                                             
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
Date                                                                           
                                                                     
                  Chairperson
FORM NO. 6
APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
   Shelby, Ohio
Date                                                                Application
Number                                                    
The undersigned applies for minor subdivision approval under Ohio R.C. 711.131
and certifies that all material submitted with this application is true and
correct.  Action must be taken within seven working days.
Signature                                                                      
                                                                     
Address                                                                        
                                                                   
Phone                                                                          
                                                                     
Minor subdivision approval may be granted only under the following conditions:
   1.   The proposed subdivision is along an existing public road and involves
no openings, widening or extension of any street.
   2.   No more than five lots are involved after the original parcel has been
completely subdivided.
   3.   The subdivision is not contrary to applicable platting, subdividing or
zoning regulations.  A variance can only be requested before the entire
Commission.
   4.   The property has been surveyed and a sketch and legal description are
submitted.
   5.   Compliance with design standards, §§
1246.02 and
1246.03, shall be made even though no plat is required.
Note:  City Charter, §
98, requires a plat for any subdivision.  The subdivider is advised to review
the requirements of the Charter.
(Ord. 13-2019, passed 7-15-2019)
FORM NO. 7
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION VARIANCE
   Shelby Planning Commission
   Shelby, Ohio
Date                                                                Application
Number                                                    
Name                                                                          
                                                                     
Address                                                                       
                                                                       
Phone                                                                          
                                                                     
1.   Description of location                                                  
                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                     
2.   Nature of variance requested.  Describe generally the nature of the
variance.
                                                                              
                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                     
3.   Justification of variance.  On a separate sheet, please attach a statement
relative to why the variance from requirements of the Subdivision Regulations
is requested.  Address and include such items as:
   a.   Exceptional topographical or other conditions peculiar to this
particular parcel of land;
   b.   Why a literal interpretation of the Regulations would deprive the
applicant of rights enjoyed by other property owners;
   c.   That the peculiar conditions do not result from previous actions of the
applicant;
   d.   That the requested variance is the minimum variance that will allow a
reasonable division of the land;
   e.   A sketch of the area showing the location and characteristics of the
requested variance.
I certify that all information contained in this application and its
supplements is true and correct.
                                                                              
           
   Signature
FORM NO. 9
CERTIFICATION FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
   Subdivision Plat Required Statement
   The undersigned                                      hereby certify that the
attached plat correctly represents their "                                     
                        ", a subdivision of lots                              
  to dedicate to public use as such all of the streets, roads, boulevards, cul-
de-sacs, parks, planting strips and the like, shown herein and not heretofore
dedicated.
   The dimensions of the lots and streets are shown on the plat in feet and
decimal parts thereof.  Easements are reserved where indicated on the plat for
public utility purposes above and beneath the surface of the ground.
In witness whereof                                have set their hands this    
       day of                                      , 20      .
Witness:                                                    Signed:           
                                   
                                                                               
                           
   We do hereby certify that we have surveyed the premises and prepared the
attached plat and that said plat is correct; that all required survey monuments
are correctly shown thereon; that those which are necessary for construction of
improvements are in place on the site and that any remaining survey monuments
will be properly placed upon completion of construction.
               By:                                                             
                                                     
                  Licensed Land Surveyor
STATE OF OHIO   )
               ) SS
CITY OF SHELBY   )
   Before me a Notary Public in and for said city personally came              
                                   who acknowledged the signing of the
foregoing instrument to be their voluntary act and deed for the uses and
purposes therein expressed.
   In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my official seal
this                          day of                                      , 20 
      .
                                                                               
                                                   
                  Notary Public
FORM NO. 10
APPROVALS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
   Within the Three-Mile Limit of the City
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Secretary, City Planning Commission,
                  Shelby, Ohio
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  City Engineer
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Engineer
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Sanitary Engineer
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Department of Health
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Director, Richland County Regional
                  Planning Commission
Approved and accepted this                        day of                       
  , 20         and the roads, boulevards, and the like, herein dedicated to
public use are hereby accepted as such for the County of Richland, State of
Ohio.
                                                                               
   
                                                                               
   
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Commissioners
   Transferred this                              day of                       
          , 20           
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Auditor
Filed for record this                              day of                      
       , 20           
at _______M.  Recorded this                   day of                          
   , 20              in Plat Book               , Page Number                  
.
                                                                               
   
                  Richland County Recorder
   Within the City
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  Secretary, City Planning Commission
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  City Engineer
Approved this                                                  day of          
                                      ,  20                .
                                                                               
   
                  City Health Commissioner
NOTE:  If public sewer and water are available, the plat need not be signed by
the Richland County Health Department or the City Health Commissioner.
FORM NO. 10A
REQUIRED STATEMENTS AND SIGNATURES TO BE AFFIXED ON THE SUBDIVISION PLAN WITHIN
THE CITY
CITY OF SHELBY ENGINEER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the above plat and dedication. No acceptance of the
dedicated streets upon the public road system is meant or implied.
Dated:
   _______________________      __________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Shelby City Engineer
CITY OF SHELBY HEALTH COMMISSIONER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the within plat and dedication.
Dated:
   _______________________      __________________________________________________
                  Name
                  City of Shelby Health Commissioner
CITY OF SHELBY PLANNING COMMISSION
   I hereby certify that the within plat and dedication were duly approved by
the Shelby Planning Commission at its regular meeting held on the _______ day
of _________________________, 20______.
Dated:
   ________________________      __________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Chairperson
CITY OF SHELBY COUNCIL APPROVAL
   I hereby certify that the within plat on dedication were duly approved by
the Council of the City of Shelby, Ohio, at its regular meeting on _________
day of _________________________, 20______.
Dated:
   _________________________   __________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Clerk
Performance Guarantees-Amount
   I hereby certify that a performance guarantee in the amount of
________________ for the construction of required improvements for the land
contained in this plat have been provided and approved as to amount.
Dated:
   __________________________   __________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Shelby City Engineer
Performance Guarantees-Form
   I hereby certify that a performance guarantee in the amount of
________________ for the construction of required improvements for the land
contained in this plat have been provided and approved as to form.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Shelby Law Director
Auditor's Transfer
   I hereby certify that these platted lands were transferred on the _________
day of __________________________, 20______.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Richland County Auditor
County Recorder
   Filed for record this _________ day of __________________________, 20_____,
at ________________(time). Recorded this ___________ day of ________________,
20_____, in Plat Volume ______________, Page ______________.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Richland County Recorder
Tax Certification
   I hereby certify that there are no delinquent taxes or delinquent special
assessments against the land contained in this plat.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Richland County Auditor
Tax Map Office Approval
   I hereby certify that this plat has been approved.
Dated:   ___________________________   _______________________ 
___________________________
                  Name
                  Tax Map Office
(Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
FORM NO. 10B
REQUIRED STATEMENTS AND SIGNATURES TO BE AFFIXED ON THE SUBDIVISION PLAN WITHIN
THE THREE-MILE LIMIT OF CITY
CITY OF SHELBY ENGINEER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the above plat and dedication. No acceptance of the
dedicated streets upon the public road system is meant or implied.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Shelby City Engineer
RICHLAND COUNTY ENGINEER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the above plat and dedication. No acceptance of the
dedicated streets upon the public road system is meant or implied.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Richland County Engineer
CITY OF SHELBY HEALTH COMMISSIONER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the within plat and dedication.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  City of Shelby Health Commissioner
RICHLAND COUNTY HEALTH COMMISSIONER APPROVAL
   I hereby approve the within plat and dedication.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Richland County Health Commissioner
CITY OF SHELBY PLANNING COMMISSION
   I hereby certify that the within plat and dedication were duly approved by
the Shelby Planning Commission at its regular meeting held on the ____________
day of _______________________, 20_______.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Chairperson
RICHLAND COUNTY REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
   I hereby certify that the within plat and dedication were duly approved by
the Richland County Regional Planning Commission at its regular meeting held on
the _______ day of _____________________, 20_______.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Director
CITY OF SHELBY COUNCIL APPROVAL
   I hereby certify that the within plat and dedication were duly approved by
the Council of the City of Shelby, Ohio, at its regular meeting on __________
day of ________________________, 20______.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Name
                  Clerk
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS APPROVAL
   I hereby certify that the within plat and dedication were duly approved by
the Board of Commissioners of Richland County, Ohio, at its regular meeting on
the ________ day of ________________________, 20______.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  ___________________________________________________
                  ___________________________________________________
                  Richland County Commissioners
Performance Guarantees-Amount
   I hereby certify that a performance guarantee in the amount of
________________ for the construction of required improvements for the land
contained in this plat have been provided and approved as to amount.
Dated:
   __________________________   __________________________________________________
                  Shelby City Engineer
Performance Guarantees-Form
   I hereby certify that a performance guarantee in the amount of
________________ for the construction of required improvements for the land
contained in this plat have been provided and approved as to form.
Dated:
   ___________________________   ___________________________________________________
                  Shelby Law Director
Auditor's Transfer
   I hereby certify that these platted lands were transferred on the
____________ day of __________________________, 20______.
Dated:   ___________________________   __________________________________
                  Richland County Auditor
County Recorder
   Filed for record this _________ day of __________________________, 20_____,
at ________________(time). Recorded this ________ day of ________________,
20_____, in Plat Volume ______________, Page ______________.
Dated:   ___________________________   __________________________________
                  Richland County Recorder
Tax Certification
   I hereby certify that there are no delinquent taxes or delinquent special
assessments against the land contained in this plat.
Dated:   ___________________________   __________________________________
                  Richland County Auditor
Tax Map Office Approval
   I hereby certify that this plat has been approved.
Dated:   ___________________________   __________________________________
                  Tax Map Office
(Ord. 1-2004, passed 2-2-2004)
FORM NO. 11
EXTENSION AGREEMENT FOR APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT BY CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION
   Pursuant to §
1244.05(e) of the City of Shelby Subdivision Regulations and Ohio R.C. §
711.10, the time for approval or disapproval of the plat of                    
                                                                               
                                                                 submitted by  
                                 is hereby extended to                        
                , 20      .
   No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the City Planning
Commission and such approval is endorsed in writing on the plat.  The approval
of the Planning Commission or the refusal to approve shall be endorsed on the
plat within 30 days after the submission of the plat for approval, or within
such further time as the applying party may agree to.
   This agreement constitutes the agreement of the applying party to an
extension of time beyond the 30-day period for approval or disapproval.
                                                                               
                               
                  Applying Party
Dated:                                                                   
Date plat submitted to City                                       
Planning Commission:                                                          
                                                             
Extended Date:                                                    
(Ord. 17-83, passed 6-6-1983)
TITLE SIX - ZONING
      Chapter
         
1260.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
         
1262.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
         
1264.   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
         
1266.   DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONING MAP
         
1268.   R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
         
1269.   R-1-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
         
1270.   R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
         
1271.   R-2-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
         
1272.   R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
         
1274.   B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
         
1276.   B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
         
1278.   B-3 HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
         
1280.   OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
         
1282.   I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
         
1284.   I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
         
1286.   MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
         
1288.   CD CONSERVATION DISTRICT
         
1290.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
         
1292.   NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND BUILDINGS
         
1294.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
         
1296.   SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
         
1298.   GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
         ZONING APPENDICES:
            
APPX. I.   APPLICATION FOR A ZONING CERTIFICATE
            
APPX. II.   APPLICATION FOR A CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATE
            
APPX. III.   APPLICATION FOR A VARIANCE
            
APPX. IV.   APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT TO THE CITY ZONING CODE
            
APPX. V.   APPLICATION FOR A NONCONFORMITY CERTIFICATE
            
APPX. VI.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN (1990)
CHAPTER 1260:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1260.01   Short title
   
1260.02   Authorization
   
1260.03   Statement of purpose
   
1260.04   Compliance required
   
1260.05   Amendments
   
1260.06   Repealer
   
1260.07   Separability
   
1260.08   Interpretation; conflicts of laws
   
1260.09   Construction; definitions
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1260.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This Title Six of Part Twelve of these Codified Ordinances shall be known
and may be cited as the city "Zoning Code." 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.02  AUTHORIZATION.
   The authority for establishing this Zoning Code is derived from R.C. Chapter
713, as amended.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Zoning Code is to provide planning standards, criteria,
procedures, regulations and controls for the use of land in the city in order
to most effectively ensure and preserve the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort and general welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.04  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land
be used, designed or arranged for any purpose, except in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.05  AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition,
after two notices properly published and a hearing not less than 30 days after
the first notice, amend the regulations and districts herein established, in a
manner provided by law. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the
Council to the City Planning Commission for report. Any such amendment that has
been modified or has failed to receive the approval of the Planning Commission
shall not be passed and approved, except by a three-fourths vote of Council.
Two notices of public hearing shall be published in accordance with the law,
the first of which shall be at least 30 days prior to a public hearing and
shall include the time and place of the hearing and a statement that
opportunity will be afforded to any persons interested to be heard. The names
of any person or persons desiring an amendment of the Zoning Districts Map
shall accompany the petition for such amendment, with the names and addresses
of the owners of all properties contiguous to and directly across the street
from the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted. All applications for a
zoning amendment shall indicate the following:
      (1)   Evidence that the existing Zoning Code is unreasonable with regard
to the particular property in question and deprives the property owner of the
lawful and reasonable use of his or her land. For the purposes of this Zoning
Code, a limitation upon financial or economic gain from the land in question
shall not constitute unreasonable zoning or just cause for granting an
exception to the provisions of this Zoning Code; and
      (2)   Evidence that the proposed amendment would result in an equal or
better zoning than that existing.
   (b)   City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by ordinance
a schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for an amendment to this Zoning
Code, as indicated in §
1262.08. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.06  REPEALER.
   Upon the effective date of this Zoning Code, all zoning legislation enacted
heretofore shall be and is hereby repealed. The repeal does not affect or
impair any act done, any offense committed, any right accruing, or any
liability or penalty incurred, prior to the enactment of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.07  SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intent of Council that if any provision of
this Zoning Code, or the application thereof to any zoning lot, building or
other structure, or tract of land, is declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, or to be
inapplicable to any person or situation, the effect of such decision shall be
limited to the provision which is expressly stated in the decision to be
invalid or ineffective to the zoning lot, building or other structure, or tract
of land, immediately involved in the controversy. All other provisions of this
Zoning Code shall continue to be separate and fully effective, and the
application of any such provision to other persons or situations shall not be
affected.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.08  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning
Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not
intended by this Zoning Code to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing law or with any rules, regulations or certificates
previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to
law and regulations governing the use of buildings or premises; provided,
however, that where this Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction than that
which is required by existing law, rules, regulations or certificates, the
provisions of this Zoning Code shall control.
   (b)   In the event that any of the requirements of this Zoning Code are
found to be inconsistent, one with the other, the more restrictive or greater
requirement shall be deemed in each case to be applicable. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1260.09  CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The following rules of construction shall apply to the provisions of
this Zoning Code:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive.
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and words used in the
plural number shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary.
      (4)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "maintained for" or
"occupied for".
      (5)   The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions and events shall apply.
      (6)   The word "or" indicates that connected items, conditions,
provisions and events may apply.
      (7)   The term "either/or" indicates that connected items, conditions,
provisions and events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      (8)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
   (b)   As used in this Zoning Code, the following words and terms shall have
the definitions indicated:
      (1)   "Accessory building." A building located on property under common
ownership with the principal building, which is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the main building, including but not limited to detached
garages, storage buildings, sheds, barns, shelters and decorative structures.
      (2)   "Accessory use." A use which is customarily considered incidental
and subordinate to, and located on the same lot as, the principal use or
building. "Accessory use" includes but is not limited to the following:
         A.   Residential accommodations for servants, caretakers or night
watchman in any use district;
         B.   Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities;
         C.   Off-street loading and parking facilities and the storage of
goods used, produced or offered for sale, in Business and Industrial Districts
only;
         D.   Garage or other casual sales of personal property, as long as
they are held no more frequently than three times a year and for no longer than
three days each time. The advertising restrictions contained in this section
shall not apply to such sales;
         E.   The storage of motor vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles or
boats owned by residents of the premises only. Storage of any such items for
nonresidents, whether or not a fee is charged, shall be deemed a business use.
No such storage shall be closer to the road than the minimum front yard setback
requirements of §
1266.13;
         F.   The keeping, but not boarding, of dogs, cats or farm animals.
However, the keeping of exotic or dangerous animals, such as but not limited to
lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, cougars, bobcats, wolves, foxes, apes,
gorillas, poisonous or constrictor snakes, crocodiles or alligators, shall be
prohibited; and
         G.   Dish antennas or similar satellite receiving stations for
reception of communication signals; provided that these shall be located only
in the rear yard and shall meet the minimum rear and side yard setback
requirements for the district in which they are located.
      (3)   "Agriculture." The use of land for farming purposes, including
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, floriculture, horticulture, viticulture,
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating or storing of produce, provided that the operations of such accessory
uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. A use
shall be classified as farming or "agriculture" only if it is the principal or
main use of the land.
      (4)   "Alley." A public right-of-way which usually affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
      (5)   "Alteration." Any change, addition or rearrangement in construction
or occupancy, or any change in the structural parts of a building, such as
walks, windows, partitions, columns or girders, or the moving of a building
from one location or position to another.
      (6)   "Automotive, manufactured home, travel trailer and farm implement
sales." The sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, manufactured homes,
travel trailers or farm implements, but not including repair work, except
incidental warranty repair of the same, to be displayed and sold on the
premises.
      (7)   "Automotive repair." The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and
steam cleaning of vehicles.
      (8)   "Automotive wrecking." The dismantling or wrecking of used motor
vehicles, manufactured homes or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
      (9)   "Basement." A story that is all or partly underground, but having
at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
      (10)   "Boarding house." A dwelling where meals or lodging and meals are
provided, for compensation, to two or more persons.
      (11)   "Building." Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or chattels, which is
permanently affixed to the land and has one or more floors and a roof.
"Building" includes the area devoted to porches, stairways, fire escapes and
fixed canopies. When a structure is divided by a fire wall, each separate part
of such structure shall constitute a separate building. "Building" shall not
include such structures as billboards, fences, radio towers, water towers,
smokestacks, grain elevators, coal bunkers or similar structures with interior
spaces not normally accessible for human use.
      (12)   "Building height." The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of a building to the highest point
of the roof surface for a flat roof and to the deck line of a mansard roof, and
the average height between eaves and the ridge line of a gable, hip or gambrel
roof.
      (13)   "Building, principal." The building which houses the main activity
performed on a lot.
      (14)   "Building setback line." A line defining the minimum front, side
and rear yard setback requirements in which no building or structure may be
located, except as otherwise provided herein, and which is generally parallel
with and measured from the lot line.
      (15)   "Clinic." An establishment where human patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination or treatment by a group of physicians,
dentists or similar professionals.
      (16)   "Club." An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but
not operated for profit.
      (17)   "Conditional use." A use permitted within a district, other than a
principally permitted use, requiring a conditional use permit and approval of
the City Planning Commission.
      (18)   "Condominium." A building or group of buildings in which units are
individually owned, but in which the structure, common areas and facilities are
owned on a proportional, undivided basis by all of the property owners.
      (19)   "Convalescent or nursing home." A structure with sleeping rooms
where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and
medical care.
      (20)   "Density." The number of dwelling units that can be developed on a
given acre of land.
      (21)   "Development." The construction of a new building or other
structure on a lot, or the use of open land for a new use.
      (22)   "Dwelling." A building (except a manufactured home) which is
wholly or partly used, or intended to be used, for living or sleeping by one or
more human occupants and built on a site complying with the local building
codes or built completely or partially off-site and complying with the basic
building codes of the state for industrialized units.
      (23)   "Dwelling, multiple-family." A building or portion thereof
designed exclusively for, or converted for, occupancy by three or more families
living independently of one another.
      (24)   "Dwelling, single-family." A building designed exclusively for and
occupied by one family.
      (25)   "Dwelling, two-family." A building designed exclusively for, or
converted for, occupancy by two families living independently of each other.
      (26)   "Dwelling unit." Space, within a dwelling, comprising living,
dining and sleeping rooms and storage closets, as well as space and equipment
for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all of which is used by only one
family and its household employees.
      (27)   "Family." One or more persons who live together as a single
housekeeping unit and use common cooking facilities, as distinguished from a
group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel, with the exception
that a separate housekeeping unit in the residence for a parent or other person
related by blood or marriage would be permitted.
      (28)   "Fence." A structure designed or intended to enclose or screen.
      (29)   "Floor area, residential." The sum of the gross horizontal area of
the several floors of a residential building, excluding basement floor areas
not devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed porches and
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between interior faces of
walls.
      (30)   "Floor area, usable." For the purpose of computing parking
requirements, that area used or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise
or services, or to serve patrons, clients, patients or customers. Such floor
area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or
processing of merchandise, or for hallways, utilities or sanitary facilities,
shall be excluded from the computation. "Usable floor area" shall be the sum of
the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the
exterior walls.
      (31)   "Garage, private." A detached accessory building or portion of a
principal building, designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of
motor driven vehicles, boats or similar vehicles owned and used by the
occupants of the premises, provided that no business occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein and that space therein for more than one car is
not leased to a nonresident of the premises.
      (32)   "Garage, public." A principal or accessory building, other than a
private garage, used for parking or temporary storage of passenger vehicles,
and in which no service shall be provided for remuneration.
      (33)   "Garage service repair." A place where the following services may
be carried out: general automotive repair, engine rebuilding, sale of engine
fuels, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service such
as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, and overall painting and
undercoating of automobiles.
      (34)   "Greenbelt." An open landscaped area free of buildings and
maintained with permanent plant materials to provide a screen to abutting
properties.
      (35)   "Home occupation." Any occupation conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, provided that:
         A.   No more than one person, other than members of the family
residing on the premises, shall be engaged in such occupation;
         B.   The home occupation shall be confined to one floor and to an area
not exceeding 25% of that floor;
         C.   Any extension or modification of the dwelling does not alter its
outward appearance as a dwelling;
         D.   There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation, other than one sign not exceeding two square feet in area, non-
illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
         E.   There shall be no display of stock-in-trade or commodities sold,
except those which are produced on the premises;
         F.   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet
the off-street parking requirements specified in this Zoning Code and shall not
be located in the required front yard; and
         G.   Clinics, hospitals, tourist homes, animal hospitals and
commercial kennels, among other activities, shall not be deemed to be "home
occupations".
      (36)   "Hotel." A structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held
out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for
pay to transient guests, in which five or more rooms are used for the
accommodation of such guests, such sleeping accommodations being conducted in
the same building or in buildings in connection therewith; and every building
or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public
to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transient
guests, in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such
guests.
      (37)   "Institution." A building and/or land designed to aid individuals
in need of physical, mental, therapeutic or rehabilitative care or other
correctional services.
      (38)   "Junk." Scrap metals and wood of all types; bones, rags, used
bottles or cans or paper packaging; old or used machinery, tools, equipment,
appliances, motor vehicles or parts thereof; used construction materials; and
any and all other manufactured goods which are so worn, deteriorated or
obsolete as to make them unusable in their present condition, but which may be
subject to salvage or remanufacture. The definition of junk motor vehicle as
provided by R C. § 4737.05 shall apply herein.
      (39)   "Junkyard." A parcel of land where junk is bought, sold,
exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled.
      (40)   "Kennel, commercial." Any lot or premises on which four or more
domesticated animals more than four months of age are housed, groomed, bred,
boarded, trained or sold, or which offers provisions for minor medical
treatment.
      (41)   "Loading space, off-street." A space logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking
spaces are filled. Required "off-street loading space" is not to be included as
off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
All off-street loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or
alley right-of-way.
      (42)   "Lot." A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by
one or more buildings and the accessory building or uses customarily incidental
to it, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the
provisions of this Zoning Code. The "lot" shall have frontage on an improved
public or private street.
      (43)   "Lot area." The total square footage within the lot lines of a
lot.
      (44)   "Lot corner." A lot at the point of intersection of, and abutting
on, two or more intersection streets.
      (45)   "Lot coverage." The part or percent of the lot occupied by all
buildings.
      (46)   "Lot depth." The horizontal distance between the street right-of-
way line and the rear lot line, measured along the median between the side lot
lines. Where the right-of-way line is not established, it shall be assumed to
be 30 feet from the centerline of the street.
      (47)   "Lot frontage." The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets
shall be considered "frontage".
      (48)   "Lot, interior." A lot other than a corner lot.
      (49)   "Lot lines." The lines defining the limits of a lot as described
below:
         A.   "Front lot line." In the case of an interior lot, it is the line
separating said lot from the street right-of-way line. In the case of a corner
lot or double frontage lot, it is the line separating said lot from either
street right-of-way line.
         B.   "Rear lot line." The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the
case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than 30 feet long, lying farthest from
the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
         C.   "Side lot line." Any lot line other than the front or rear lot
line.
      (50)   "Lot width." The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured between the two points where the minimum building setback line
intersects the side lot lines.
      (51)   "Manufactured home."  A structure that is fabricated in an off-
site facility and constructed in compliance with the federal construction and
safety standards established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
pursuant to the "Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974", 88 Stat. 700, 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 5401, 5403, and that has a permanent label
or tag affixed to it, as specified in 42 U.S.C.A. § 5415, certifying compliance
with all applicable federal construction and safety standards.
      (52)   "Manufactured home park." Any site, parcel or tract of land under
single ownership and upon which three or more independent manufactured homes
are parked and used for dwelling and sleeping purposes.
      (53)   "Manufacturing, heavy." Manufacturing, processing, assembling,
storing, testing and similar industrial uses which are generally major
operations and extensive in character, which require large sites, open storage
and services and facilities, and ready access to regional transportation, and
which normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust,
glare, air pollution, water pollution and heavy traffic, but not beyond the
district boundary.
      (54)   "Manufacturing, light." Manufacturing or other industrial uses
which are usually controlled operations, relatively clean, quiet and free of
smoke, noise, odor or dust, or which operate and store within enclosed
structures and generate little industrial traffic and no nuisances.
      (55)   "Master plan." The Comprehensive Plan, including graphic and
written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools,
public buildings and private land use development in the city.
      (56)   "Mobile home." A structure that is fabricated in an off-site
facility that is more than 35 body feet in length or, when erected on site, is
320 or more square feet, that is built on a permanent chassis and transportable
in one or more sections, and that does not qualify as a manufactured home as
defined in division (b)(52) of this section.
      (57)   "Nonconforming building." A building or portion thereof lawfully
existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments thereto, that
does not conform to the area and height regulations of the district in which it
is located.
      (58)   "Nonconforming lot." A single lot of record lawfully existing on
the effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments thereto, that does not
conform to the requirements of area, width or depth for the district in which
it is located.
      (59)   "Nonconforming use." A land use lawfully existing at the time of
enactment of this Zoning Code, or amendments thereto, which does not conform to
the use provisions of the district in which it is located.
      (60)   "Nursery, day." A building, place or location, or any combination
thereof, that is used for the purpose of housing and caring for children
unaccompanied by parents during the daylight hours.
      (61)   "Nursery, plant materials." Land, buildings or structures, or any
combination thereof, for the storage, cultivation or transplanting of live
trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including
products used for gardening or landscaping.
      (62)   "Nursing home." A home used for the reception and care of
individuals who, by reason of illness or physical or mental impairment, require
skilled nursing care, and of individuals who require personal assistance but
not skilled nursing care.
      (63)   "Off-street parking." An area, structure or space located totally
outside of any street or alley right-of-way which is used for temporary storage
of motor vehicles and is available to the public, whether for a fee, for free
or as an accommodation for employees, clients or customers.
      (64)   "Open space." Any part of a lot, including courts and yards, which
is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky. The area may
include, along with the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming
pools, tennis courts and any other recreational facilities that the City
Planning Commission deems permissible. Streets, parking areas, structures for
habitation and the like shall not be included.
      (65)   "Parking space." An area of definite length and width, exclusive
of aisles and drives or entrances giving access thereto, and fully accessible
for the temporary parking of permitted motor vehicles.
      (66)   "Planned unit development." Any area of land where both
individual, residential building sites and common property devoted to parks,
playgrounds and/or school sites are designed and organized to be capable of
satisfactory use and operation as a self-contained residential area. The
development may use more flexible standards, such as those for lot size and
setbacks, than would normally apply under these regulations. The development
may also incorporate commercial facilities to serve the residential
neighborhood.
      (67)   "Public utility." Any person, firm, corporation, governmental
agency or board fully authorized to furnish, under governmental regulations, to
the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraphy, transportation,
sewer, water or television cable service.
      (68)   "Restaurant." A public eating establishment in which the primary
function is the preparation and serving of food for consumption on or off the
premises, but which is not licensed by the state to sell beer or intoxicating
liquor.
      (69)   "Right-of-way." A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a
public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally includes curbs, lawn
strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special
features such as grade separation, landscaped areas and bridges.
      (70)   "Rooming house." A dwelling or part thereof where lodging is
provided for compensation for four or fewer unrelated persons and where no
cooking or dining facilities are provided to those persons in individual rooms
or elsewhere on the premises.
      (71)   “Sexually oriented business.”
         A.   "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion
picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, sexual
device shop, sexual encounter center, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency, and adult motel, all as defined herein and/or in §
838 02 (Definitions) of
Chapter 838 (Sexually Oriented Businesses) of these Codified Ordinances, but
does not include a business solely by reason of its showing, selling, or
renting materials that may depict sex.
         B.   "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
         C.   "Adult bookstore" or "adult video store" means a commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photograph films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         D.   "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, juice bar restaurant,
bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, which regularly features:
            1.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
            2.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or
            3.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         E.   "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, are regularly shown to more than five individuals.
         F.   "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
            1.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration, provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproduction which is characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult-type of photographic reproductions;
            2.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours; or
            3.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
         G.   "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appeal in a state of nudity, or live performances which
are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
         H.   "Escort agency" means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.
         I.   "Nude or seminude model studio" means any place where a person
who appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or any
other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
         J.   1.   "Sexual encounter establishment" means a business or
commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers,
for any form of consideration, a place where either of the following occur:
               a.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort
for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities; or
               b.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose
of displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration
or compensation in any type or form.
            2.   An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a
"sexual encounter establishment."
         K.   "Specified anatomical areas" means human genitals, pubic region,
and buttocks and the human female breasts below the point immediately above the
top of the areola.
         L.   "Specified sexual activities" means sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of these activities.
      (72)   "Sign." Any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wood,
plaster, stone or other sign of any kind or character whatsoever which shall
be/is placed to attract attention to any object, product, location, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. The term "placed" shall include
erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing,
stacking, carrying, fastening or making visible in any manner whatsoever.
"Sign" shall not include the flag, pennant, lodge or insignia of any
governmental, religious, educational or similar organization.
      (73)   "Story." The part of building included between the surface of one
floor and the surface of the next floor above, or the ceiling if there is no
floor above.
      (74)   "Street, private." An improved right-of-way having all the
characteristics of a public street, except that the street shall not be
dedicated or deeded to public use, and maintenance and repair shall not be the
responsibility of the city.
      (75)   "Street, public." An improved right-of-way which is used for the
movement of goods and people and provides for vehicular and pedestrian access
to abutting properties, and which has been dedicated or deeded to public use
and accepted by the city, which includes all lands between the right-of-way
lines, and may incorporate the curbs, sidewalks, landscaped areas, street
pavement and berm. "Public street" shall be designated and defined as follows:
         A.   "Collector thoroughfare." A street or road which primarily
carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets and distributes traffic
from the arterials to local streets. Access to abutting properties is equal in
importance to the movement of through traffic. "Collector thoroughfares" are
designated on the Thoroughfare Plan of the city, as set forth in
Appendix VI following the text of
Chapter 1298 of this Zoning Code.
         B.   "Cul-de-sac." A local thoroughfare of relatively short length
with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turn-
around.
         C.   "Dead-end-street." A local thoroughfare temporarily having only
one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in
the future.
         D.   "Local thoroughfare." A street or road which is intended
primarily to provide access to residential or other abutting property. Through
traffic should be discouraged on such streets. "Local thoroughfares" are
designated on the Thoroughfare Plan of the city, as set forth in
Appendix VI following the text of
Chapter 1298 of this Zoning Code.
         E.   "Major arterial thoroughfare." A street or road which is intended
to carry the major portion of traffic entering or leaving the urban area and
also significant intra-urban travel. Major arterials should form the boundaries
of residential neighborhoods. Access or service to abutting properties is
secondary in importance to the provision of travel service. "Major arterial
thoroughfares" are designated on the Thoroughfare Plan of the city, as set
forth in Zoning
Appendix VI following the text of
Chapter 1298 of this Zoning Code.
         F.   "Minor arterial thoroughfare." A street or road which is intended
to connect with and augment the major arterial system. The purpose of a minor
arterial is to provide travel service to trips of moderate length and to
provide intra-community continuity. Providing access to abutting properties is
a secondary function to the movement of through traffic. "Minor arterial
thoroughfares" are designated on the Thoroughfare Plan of the city, as set
forth in
Appendix VI following the text of
Chapter 1298 of this Zoning Code.
      (76)   "Structure." Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on or below the ground, or which is attached to something having a
fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings,
manufactured homes, mobile homes, walls, fences and billboards.
      (77)   "Swimming pool (recessed or elevated)." An artificial body of
water, with a controlled water supply over 24 inches in depth, or comprising
180 square feet of surface area or 15 feet in diameter, used or intended to be
used by the owner thereof or his or her lessees or invitees.
      (78)   "Temporary building or use." A building or use permitted to exist
during periods of construction of the principal building or use, or for special
events.
      (79)   "Thoroughfare Plan." A plan adopted by the city as part of this
Zoning Code and indicating the location of arterial, collector and local
thoroughfares within the city.
      (80)   "Townhouse dwelling." A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a residence by one family, being attached by means of a common
dividing wall or walls to one or more adjacent buildings likewise designed for
occupancy by one family. A single housing unit occupies each structure from
ground to roof, and independent and exclusive access is provided for each unit
from the outside.
      (81)   "Use." The specific purpose for which land or a building is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied.
      (82)   "Yard." A required open space, other than a court, on the same lot
as the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or
portion of a structure from the ground upward, and further defined as follows:
         A.   "Front yard." An open space extending the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-
of-way line and the nearest point of the principal building.
         B.   "Rear yard." An open space extending the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the nearest point of the principal building.
         C.   "Side yard." An open space between the side lot line and the
principal building, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width
of which is the minimum horizontal distance from the side lot line to the
nearest point of the principal building.
      (83)   "Zoning exception and variance."
         A.   1.   "Exception." A use permitted only after review of an
application by the Board of Zoning Appeals, such review being necessary because
the provisions of this Zoning Code covering conditions are not precise enough
to cover all applications without interpretation, and such review is required
by this Zoning Code.
            2.   "Variance." A modification of the literal provisions of this
Zoning Code, which may be granted when strict enforcement of this Zoning Code
would cause undue hardship, owing to circumstances unique to the individual
property for which the variance is sought. The crucial factors of a variance
are undue hardship and unique circumstances to the property. A variance is not
justified unless both elements are present in the case.
         B.   The exception differs from the variance in several respects. An
exception does not require "undue hardship" in order to be allowed. The
exception, as stated within applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, is a
form of "special approval" on review by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 21-95, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 24-98, passed
7-6-1998; Ord. 28- 2010, passed 12-6-2010)
CHAPTER 1262:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
   
1262.01   General authority of Zoning Inspector
   
1262.02   Appointment and removal of Zoning Inspector; duties
   
1262.03   Conditions requiring a zoning certificate
   
1262.04   Applications for zoning certificates
   
1262.05   Conditional zoning certificates
   
1262.06   Site plan review
   
1262.07   Approval of sanitary sewer disposal systems required prior to
issuance of building permits or zoning certificates
   
1262.08   Fees, permit
   
1262.09   Nuisances; report of possible violations to Zoning Inspector
   
1262.10   Inspections; orders to correct
   
1262.11   Correction period; responsibility of Law Director
 
   
1262.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   General provisions and definitions, see
Ch. 1260
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1262.01  GENERAL AUTHORITY OF ZONING INSPECTOR.
   The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Inspector or his or her deputies, or such other officials as may be
designated by the Shelby City Council.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.02  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF ZONING INSPECTOR; DUTIES.
   (a)   A Zoning Inspector shall be employed for the purpose of granting
zoning certificates and to make inspections of premises or buildings necessary
in carrying out his or her duties in compliance with the provisions of this
Zoning Code. The Zoning Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council, and his or her removal shall also be initiated by the
Mayor.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Inspector to issue certificates or
approve any plans until he or she has inspected such plans in detail and found
them to conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code. The Zoning Inspector
shall record and issue certificates for nonconforming uses existing on the
effective date of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   The Zoning Inspector shall be responsible for submitting to the City
Planning Commission all applications for conditional zoning certificates. The
Zoning Inspector shall not refuse to issue a zoning certificate when the
provisions or conditions of this Zoning Code are complied with by the
applicant.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.03  CONDITIONS REQUIRING A ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   A zoning certificate shall be required for the following:
   (a)   Construction of or structural modification in any building, including
accessory buildings;
   (b)   Change in the use of an existing building or accessory building to a
use of a different classification;
   (c)   Occupancy and use of vacant land;
   (d)   Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification; and
   (e)   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.04  APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   Before constructing, changing the use of, or making structural
modifications in any building (including accessory buildings), or changing the
use of any premises, application shall be made to the Zoning Inspector for a
zoning certificate. The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   A plat plan, drawn to a scale of not less than ten feet to the
inch, showing the actual shape, location and exact dimensions of the property
to be built upon;
      (2)   The shape, size and location of all buildings and other structures
to be erected, altered or moved, and of any building or other structure already
on the property;
      (3)   The existing and intended use of the property, including, in
residential areas, the total number of dwelling units to be accommodated in the
building; and
      (4)   Any other pertinent data that may be required to determine whether
the provisions of this Zoning Code are being observed properly.
   (b)   Within 20 days after receipt of the application, the Zoning Inspector
shall issue a zoning certificate if the application complies with the
requirements of this Zoning Code and the application is accompanied by a proper
fee, as indicated in §
1262.08, below. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall
be notified of such refusal and cause within the 20-day period.
   (c)   Unless construction is started within one year from the date of
issuance, the zoning certificate shall become void and a new certificate shall
be required upon proper application.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.05  CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   Purpose.  Provision is made in this Zoning Code for a more detailed
consideration of each of certain specified uses or activities, as the same may
relate to proposed conditions of location, design, size, operation, intensity
or use, the generation of traffic and traffic movement, the concentration of
population, the processes and equipment employed, and the amount and kind of
public facilities and services required, together with any other structural
uses possessing these particularly unique characteristics. Such specified uses
or activities are designated as conditionally permitted uses and are permitted
through the issuances of a conditional zoning certificate, with such conditions
and safeguards attached as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the
public welfare.
   (b)   Procedure.  Any application for a conditional zoning certificate for
any land use or structure permitted under this Zoning Code shall be submitted
in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Submission to City Planning Commission. An application for a
conditional zoning certificate shall be submitted to the City Planning
Commission on a special form provided for that purpose. The City Planning
Commission, where appropriate, may refer an application to qualified
consultants for a report if it seems the proposed use may cause undue traffic
generation, population concentrations or extra size sewer and/or water utility
systems. The cost of the report shall be at the expense of the applicant and
the report shall be furnished to the City Planning Commission within 30 days
from the date upon which it was requested.
      (2)   Data required with application. Applications for conditional zoning
certificates shall include the following:
         A.   The form supplied by the Zoning Inspector and completed by the
applicant; and
         B.   A site plan, plot plan or development plan of the entire property
being considered, drawn at a scale of one inch = 100 feet and showing the
location of all abutting streets and structures, the types of buildings and
their intended use.
      (3)   Review by City Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission
shall review the proposed development, as presented, on the submitted plans and
specified use. In cases where the City Planning Commission requests a report
from a consultant, the application will not be reviewed until the City Planning
Commission has received the report, along with a receipt for the cost of the
report. The review shall be completed and made public within 60 days following
the date the application was submitted.
      (4)   Issuance and revocation of conditional zoning certificates. Only
upon conclusion of review procedures relative to a particular application may
the Commission issue a conditional zoning certificate. A breach of any
safeguard, condition or requirement shall automatically invalidate the
certificate granted and shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code. This
violation shall be declared a nuisance as per §
1262.09.
      (5)   Continuation of existing uses declared to be conditionally
permissible. The owner of any use existing at the time of the enactment of this
Zoning Code and conditionally permissible within its district, as determined
under this Zoning Code by the City Planning Commission, shall apply within one
year after the enactment of this Zoning Code to the Zoning Inspector for a
conditional zoning certificate and the Zoning Inspector shall issue the
certificate.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   A site plan shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission for
approval of:
      (1)   Any use or development for which the submission of a development
plan is required by any provision of this Zoning Code;
      (2)   Any conditionally permitted use within any R-Residential District;
or
      (3)   A planned unit development as provided for in
Chapter 1290.
   (b)   Every site plan submitted to the City Planning Commission shall
contain such information and be submitted in such form as the City Planning
Commission may prescribe in its rules. Supporting evidence in the form of a
map, chart, table or drawing shall be declared to be an exact or accurate
representation of the development proposal shown on the site plan.
   (c)   Approval of the site plan by the City Planning Commission and City
Council shall constitute approval of the development. The breach of any
requirement or the misrepresentation of facts, figures or other supporting
evidence by the applicant shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in §
1262.99 and shall automatically invalidate the zoning certificate granted.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.07  APPROVAL OF SANITARY SEWER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS REQUIRED PRIOR TO
ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS OR ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   No building permit or zoning certificate shall be issued without evidence
that the City Division of Health has approved the sanitary disposal system for
which the building permit or zoning certificate has been requested.  This
provision does not apply to areas that are serviced by community sewer and
water facilities.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.08  FEES, PERMIT.
   (a)   City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by ordinance
a schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for all applications and permits
as indicated in division (e) hereof.
   (b)   City Council shall, by ordinance, establish a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning certificates,
amendments, appeals, exceptions, variances, conditional use certificates, plan
approvals and other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this Zoning Code and requiring investigations, inspections, legal advertising,
postage and other expenses. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the City
Hall and the office of the Zoning
Inspector and may be altered or amended only by City Council. Until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall
be taken on any application or appeal.
   (c)   When the City Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals deems
it necessary to cause special studies to be made, the applicant shall bear all
direct and related costs.
   (d)   All fees shall be paid to the Zoning Inspector at the time an
application is filed or whenever a certificate, amendment, appeal, exception,
variance, conditional use certificate, plan approval or other matter is
requested.
   (e)   A schedule of fees is hereby established as follows:
 
Zoning Permits
Residential Use Fee
One-family dwelling unit         $25
Two-family dwelling unit         $35
Multiple-family dwelling unit    $25 + $10 for each additional unit
Temporary building               $10
Accessory building - residential $10
Accessory building - commercial  $25 + $1 per 1,000 sq. ft.; maximum $200
Accessory building - industrial  $25 + $1 per 1,000 sq. ft.; maximum $200
Business use                     $50 + $1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Industrial use                   $60 + $1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Temporary visitors permit        $5
Sign permit                      $10
Zoning book                      $5
 
 
Conditional Zoning Permits
Residential                             $60
Business                                $60
Industrial                              $60
Variance                                $60
Appeal to Board of Zoning Appeals       $60
Appeals of Zoning Inspector's Decision  $60
Application for amendment to resolution $60
 
(Ord. 24-99, passed 6-21-1999)
§ 1262.09  NUISANCES; REPORT OF POSSIBLE VIOLATIONS TO ZONING INSPECTOR.
   Buildings erected, altered, moved, razed or converted, or any use of land or
premises carried on in violation of any provision of this Zoning Code, are
declared to be a nuisance per se. Any building or land use activities
considered possible violations of the provisions of this Zoning Code, which are
observed by any city official, shall be reported to the Zoning Inspector. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.10  INSPECTIONS; ORDERS TO CORRECT.
   The Zoning Inspector shall inspect each alleged violation and shall, in
writing, order the correction of all conditions which are found to be in
violation of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.11  CORRECTION PERIOD; RESPONSIBILITY OF LAW DIRECTOR.
   All violations shall be corrected within a period of 30 days after the
written order is issued or for a longer period of time as indicated by the
Zoning Inspector in the written order. Any violations not corrected within the
specified period of time shall be reported to the City Law Director, who shall
initiate prosecution procedures.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1262.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever, being the owner or owners of any building or premises or part
thereof where anything in violation of this Zoning Code is placed or exists, or
a tenant or occupant of the building or premises, or an architect, builder or
contractor who assists in the commission of any such violation, or any other
person, violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Zoning
Code shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each offense.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1264:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
   
1264.01   Establishment; general authority
   
1264.02   Membership; appointment; terms; vacancies
   
1264.03   Officers; rules
   
1264.04   Minutes; records
   
1264.05   Meetings; power to subpoena
   
1264.06   Powers and duties
   
1264.07   Appeals
   
1264.08   Decisions of the Board; notices
   
1264.09   Fees, application
Cross-reference:
   Fees (permit), see §
1262.08
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   General provisions and definitions, see
Ch. 1260
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1264.01  ESTABLISHMENT; GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established. The Board shall perform the
duties and exercise the powers provided in R.C. § 713.11 in such a way that the
objectives of this Zoning Code shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.02  MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Each of the city's four wards shall
have one representative and the fifth member shall be "at large". Each member
shall be appointed for a period of five years, except that initial members
shall be appointed as follows: One for one year; one for two years; one for
three years; one for four years; and one for five years. In the event of the
death or resignation of a member, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the City
Council, shall make the appointment for the duration of the unexpired portion
of the term of the member. The members of the Board shall be residents of the
city and shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.03  OFFICERS; RULES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Secretary and shall prescribe rules in accordance with this chapter for the
conduct of its affairs.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.04  MINUTES; RECORDS.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon a question, or, if a member is absent or fails to
vote, indicating that fact. The Board shall file a record of proceedings in the
office of the Clerk of Council, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.05  MEETINGS; POWER TO SUBPOENA.
   (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall meet at the call of its Chairperson
or two other members and at such other regular times as specified in the
Board's Rules of Procedure. All hearings held by the Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall require a quorum of three members at all meetings, and
the concurring vote of at least three members shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Inspector, or to
decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass, or to effect any variations in this Zoning Code. 
   (b)   The Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and to compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files
and other material which may serve as evidence relative to the matters before
it.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.06  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the
zoning district classification of any property, nor to make a change in the
terms of this Zoning Code, but the Board shall have the power to act on those
matters where this Zoning Code provides for an administration review,
interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a
variance as defined in this section and in the laws of the State of Ohio. The
powers shall include:
   (a)   Appeals.  The Board shall hear and decide all appeals from any
decision or action of the Zoning Inspector or any other administrative official
in carrying out or enforcing any provision of this Zoning Code.
   (b)   Variances. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
Zoning Code, the Board shall have the power in passing on appeals to vary any
of the provisions of this Zoning Code relating to the construction or
structure. The Board shall authorize a variance from the strict application of
the provisions of this Zoning Code where evidence is submitted showing that: 
      (1)   By reason of an exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary physical land conditions applying to the
property that do not generally apply to other properties or uses within the
same zoning district or neighborhood, the strict application of the provisions
of this Zoning Code would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code.
      (2)   The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment
to the public interest or to property or improvements in the district in which
the variance is sought, and will not materially impair the purpose of this
Zoning Code. In granting a variance, the Board may attach such conditions or
safeguards as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety or
welfare and to further the purposes and intent of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Exceptions and special approvals. The Board shall hear and decide, in
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, requests for exceptions,
for interpretations of the Zoning Districts Map and for decisions on special
approval situations on which this Zoning Code specifically authorizes the Board
to pass. Any exception or special approval shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The Board shall interpret the provisions of this Zoning Code in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, as
shown on the Zoning Districts Map, accompanying and made a part of this Zoning
Code, where the street layout on the actual ground differs from the street
layout on the Zoning Districts Map.
      (2)   The Board shall permit, upon proper application, temporary uses not
otherwise permitted in any district, for a period not to exceed 12 months,
provided that such uses do not require the erection of any capital improvement
of a structural nature.
      (3)   The Board shall permit modification of fence requirements, provided
that the modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to
surrounding or adjacent development.
      (4)   The Board shall permit modification of the height and area
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a
building or lot which is so located, or which is of such a precarious shape in
relation to surrounding development, that it cannot be appropriately improved
without the modification.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.07  APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm or
corporation, or by any officer, board or department of the city, deeming
himself, herself or itself to be adversely affected by a decision of the Zoning
Inspector regarding the interpretation of this Zoning Code. Appeals shall be
made no later than 15 calendar days after the date of the grievance. An appeal
shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the administrative officer, whose decision is appealed from, shall certify to
the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed by
other than a restraining order granted by the Board or by a court having lawful
jurisdiction. Within its powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officers and bodies from whom or which the appeal was taken, and may issue or
direct the issuance of a certificate.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.08  DECISIONS OF THE BOARD; NOTICES.
   (a)   All appeals and applications made to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be in writing and on forms prescribed therefor. Every appeal or application for
a variance or special exception shall refer to the specific provision of this
Zoning Code involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed, the use for which the certificate is sought or the details of the
appeal that is applied for and the grounds on which it should be granted, as
the case may be. Each and every decision made by the Board shall be by
resolution and shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in the
particular case. Each resolution, together with all documents pertaining
thereto, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Council by case number
under one or another of the following headings: variances; special exceptions;
interpretations; or certificates.
   (b)   When a notice of appeal has been filed in proper form with the Board,
the Secretary shall immediately place the request for appeal upon the calendar
for hearing and shall cause notices, stating the time, place and purpose of the
hearing, to be issued. The notice shall be served personally or by mail,
addressed to the parties making the request for appeal, at least 30 days prior
to the date of the scheduled hearing. Notices of the hearing will be sent to
the owners of property within 500 feet of the perimeter of the site of the
proposed deviation from this Zoning Code. Such hearing shall be advertised by
notice, on two separate non-successive days, in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the city at least ten days before the date of such
hearing. The Board, at its discretion, may send out further notices to
publicize such hearings. The Board may recess hearings from time to time, and,
if the time and place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at the
time of adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1264.09  FEES, APPLICATION.
   City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by ordinance a
schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for all variances, exceptions and
appeals as indicated in §
1262.08. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1266:  DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONING MAP
Section
   
1266.01   Establishment of districts
   
1266.02   Planned Unit Development Districts
   
1266.03   Special Districts
   
1266.04   Official Zoning Districts Map
   
1266.05   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
1266.06   Zoning of annexed areas
   
1266.07   Zoning of vacated areas
   
1266.08   Application of supplementary regulations and general exceptions
   
1266.09   Regulation of use and development
   
1266.10   Permitted and prohibited uses
   
1266.11   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1266.12   Development standards; conflicts
   
1266.13   Area and height requirements; lot size; setbacks
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   General provisions and definitions, see
Ch. 1260
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1266.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   The intended use of standard zoning districts is to delineate areas of
existing land use and development character so as to afford those areas the
regulations necessary to maintain their essential qualities and to assure that
any additional development will be in keeping with that which has already been
established. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the city is hereby divided
into the following standard zoning districts:
   (a)   R-1 Residential;
   (b)   R-1-A Residential;
   (c)   R-2 Residential;
   (d)   R-3 Residential;
   (e)   B-1 Neighborhood Business;
   (f)   B-2 General Business;
   (g)   B-3 Highway Service Business;
   (h)   OS-1 Office Service;
   (i)   I-1 Light Industrial and Manufacturing; and
   (j)   I-2 Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 51-2001, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 1266.02  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The intended purpose of Planned Unit Development Districts is to allow
predetermined large scale developments comprehensively designed and arranged
for one-family, two-family and multiple-family residences, townhouses, planned
shopping centers, highway service centers and planned industrial park
developments. It is also the intended use of Planned Unit Development Districts
to allow such developments within appropriate locations to forestall further
blight and to encourage new investment that can be attracted for desirable
development.
   (b)   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the city is hereby divided into
the following Planned Unit Development District:
      PD Planned Unit Development
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.03  SPECIAL DISTRICTS.
   The intended purpose of the Special Districts is to delineate areas where,
due to unique circumstances or development requirements, certain activity can
be carried on without subjecting the established land uses and standard zoning
districts to undue interference or disturbance. For the purposes of this Zoning
Code, the city is hereby divided into the following Special Districts:
   (a)   MHP Manufactured Home Park; and
   (b)   CD Conservation District.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.04  OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP.
   (a)   All land in the city within the scope of this Zoning Code shall be
included on the Zoning Districts Map of the city, which Map accompanies this
Zoning Code, and the Map, with all notations, references and other pertinent
material shown thereon, is hereby made a part of this Zoning Code as if fully
described herein.
   (b)   The Zoning Districts Map shall be identified by the signatures of the
members of City Council and attested by the Clerk of Council under the
following words:
      "This is to certify that this is the official Zoning Districts Map
referred to in §
1266.04 of the Zoning Code of the City of Shelby, Ohio."
   (c)   Wherever changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters
portrayed on the official Zoning Districts Map, such changes shall be made on
the official Zoning Districts Map after the amendment has been approved by City
Council, together with an entry on the official Zoning Districts Map as
follows:
      "On _____________________, by official action of the City Council, the
following changes were made: [. . .]."
   (d)   Three copies of the official Zoning Districts Map are to be maintained
and kept up-to-date by the Zoning Inspector. The original Map shall be kept in
the Richland County Regional City Planning Commission offices, one copy of the
Map shall be kept by the Chairperson of the City Planning Commission, one copy
shall be kept in the Council Chambers and one copy shall be kept in the Clerk
of Council's office.  The latter copy shall be accessible to the public and
shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lands,
buildings and other structures in the city.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.05  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts shown on the official Zoning Districts Map, the following rules shall
apply:
   (a)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow those centerlines.
   (b)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines.
   (c)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the corporation
boundary lines shall be construed as following the corporation boundary lines.
   (d)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad tracks shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
   (e)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the
centerlines.
   (f)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (a) through (e) hereof shall be so construed.
   (g)   Distances not specifically indicated on the official Zoning Districts
Map shall be determined by the use of a scale shown on the Map.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.06  ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
   Any area annexed to the city shall, upon such annexation, be classified
according to one of the zoning district classifications listed in §
1266.01 as adopted by City Council. If the annexed area was subject to township
zoning regulations at the time of the annexation, it shall continue under such
township zoning regulations in accordance with R.C. § 519.18 until City Council
shall adopt appropriate zoning for the territory. In either case, the City
Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate zoning for such area within one
month from the date the matter is first referred to the City Planning
Commission by City Council.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.07  ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
   Wherever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by action of City
Council and in a manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each
side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the
centerline of the vacation, and all areas included in the vacation shall then
be subject to the same use, area and height regulations of the extended
district.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.08  APPLICATION OF SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS AND GENERAL EXCEPTIONS.
   All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapters
1296 and
1298.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.09  REGULATION OF USE AND DEVELOPMENT.
   Regulations pertaining to the use of land and/or structures and physical
development within each of the zoning districts adopted as a standard zoning
district in this chapter, and as shown on the Zoning Districts Map, are hereby
established and adopted.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.10  PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES.
   Only a use designated as a permitted use shall be allowed as a matter of
right within a zoning district, and any use not so designated shall be
prohibited, except that, when in character with the zoning district, additional
uses may be added to the permitted uses of the zoning district by amendment of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.11  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   A use designated as a conditional use shall be allowed in a zoning district,
when the conditional use, its location, extent and method of development, will
not substantially alter the character of the vicinity or unduly interfere with
the use of adjacent lots in the manner prescribed for the zoning district. To
this end, the City Planning Commission shall, in addition to the development
standards for the zoning district, set forth such additional requirements as
will, in its judgment, render the conditional use compatible with the existing
and future use of adjacent lots and the immediately surrounding area.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.12  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; CONFLICTS.
   The development standards set forth in this Zoning Code shall be the minimum
allowed for development in a zoning district. If the development standards are
in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or laws, the more restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1266.13  AREA AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS; LOT SIZE; SETBACKS.
   The Schedule of Regulations limiting the area and height of buildings, the
minimum size of lots and the maximum density permitted, and establishing
minimum yard setback requirements, shall be as follows:
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SCHEDULE LIMITING HEIGHT, BULK, DENSITY AND AREA BY ZONING DISTRICT
 
               Min. Lot Area    Maximum Freight Minimum Yard
               Req. Per         of Building     Setback (Per Lot in Minimum
               Dwelling Unit                    Feet)               Floor
Use       D.U.                                                      Area Per
Districts Per                                         Each          Unit
          Acre Area in Width in In Feet In      Front Side Rear     (Sq.
               Sq. Ft. Ft.              Stories Yard  Yard Yard     Ft.)
CD Conservation  .20   217,000  200   30  2 50    10      50    1,200
R-1 Residential  3.96  11,000   80    30  2 30    8       40    1,200
R-1-             7.33  7,200    60    30  2 30    5       30    700
A Residential
R-2 Residential
   Single-fami5.19  8,400    60    30  2 30    5       35    800
   Two-family 8.89  4,900    35    30  2 30    5       30    700 Avg. 550
                                                                Min.
R-2-
A Residential
   Single–fa5.19  8,400    60    30  2 30    5       35    800
   Two-family 8.89  4,900    35    30  2 30    5       30    700 Avg. 550
                                                                Min
   Townhouse  15.55 1,450(a) 16(b) 35  2 25    8(c,d)  10(d) 700
dwelling
R-3 Residential
   Single-fami5.19  8,400    60    30  2 30    5       35    800
   Two-family 8.89  4,900    35    30  2 30    5       30    700 Avg. 550
                                                                Min.
   Townhouse  18.00 1,450(a) 16(b) 35  2 25    8(c, d) 10(d) 700
dwelling
   Multiple-  18.00 1,450(a) (b)   35  2 25    8(c, d) 10(d) (f)
family
MHP Manufactured
Home Park
B1 Neighborhood                       30  2 25    8(c, d) 24(e)
Business
   Townhouse  21.00 1,450(a) 16(b) 35  2 25    8(c, d) 10(d) 700
dwelling
   Multiple-  21.00 1,450(a) (b)   35  3 25    8(c, d) 10(d) (f)
family
B-2 Central                           50  3       (g)     (e)
Business
B-3 Highway                           30  2 40    (h)     (h)
Business
OS-1 Office                           50  3 30    (g)     (e)
Service
I-1 Lt.
Industrial &                          50    50(i) (k,l)   (k,l)
Mfg.
I-2 Hvy                               100   50(j) (k,l)   (k,l)
Industrial & Mfg
 
 
Notes to Schedule of Regulations:
(a) Minimum lot area is 10,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width of 70 feet, regardless of number of units.
(c) Minimum distance between any two buildings on the same lot shall be 40 feet.
(d) Wherever a side or rear yard abuts a one- or two-family Residential District, a
    minimum 25-foot width is required.
    Off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in accordance with
(e) the loading space provisions of this Zoning Code and shall be provided in
    addition to any required off-street parking facilities.
(f) The requirements for dwelling units in a multiple-family dwelling are defined as
    follows:
    (1)    Efficiency unit: A dwelling unit containing at least 350 square feet of
    floor area and consisting of not more than one room in addition to a kitchen, a
    dining room and necessary sanitary facilities. For purposes of computing density,
    it shall be considered a one-room unit.
    (2)    One-bedroom unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at
    least 500 square feet, consisting of not more than two rooms in addition to a
    kitchen, a dining room and necessary sanitary facilities. For purposes of
    computing density, it shall be considered a two-room unit.
    (3)    Two-bedroom unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of 700
    square feet, consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to a kitchen, a
    dining room and necessary sanitary facilities. For purposes of computing density,
    it shall be considered a three-room unit.
    (4)    Three-bedroom unit: A dwelling unit wherein, for each room in addition to
    the three rooms permitted for a two-bedroom unit, there shall be provided an
    additional area of 200 square feet to the minimum floor area of 700 square feet.
    For purposes of computing density, a three-bedroom unit shall be considered a
    four-room unit.
    No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the District. On
(g) an exterior side yard abutting a Residential District, there shall be provided a
    minimum side yard setback of 30 feet.
    Thirty-five feet minimum when adjacent to a Residential District and on the side
(h) adjacent to the Residential District only. Otherwise, the minimum side yard width
    and rear yard depth shall be 25 feet.
    Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy part of the required front yard
(i) after approval of the parking plan layout and points of ingress and egress by the
    Planning Commission.
    Where there is a front-to-front industrial relationship, or a front-to-side
(j) industrial relationship, the minimum front yard setback may be reduced to 25
    feet. All front yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of
    Chapter 1296.
    Side and rear yards shall be equal to at least the height of the average of the
(k) various masses, excluding towers and other appurtenances. All side and rear yards
    abutting a Residential District shall provide open space equal to at least 100
    feet in width.
    A six-foot high obscuring fence or screen, or a 20-foot wide greenbelt, measured
(l) from the lot line, shall be provided along those side and rear lot lines abutting
    a residential development.
 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 51-2001, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 4-2007,
passed 4-16-2007)
CHAPTER 1268:  R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1268.01   Establishment; locations
   
1268.02   Permitted uses
   
1268.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1268.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Construction of service stations in residential districts, see Part Eight,
Business Regulation and Taxation
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in rear yards in residential districts, see §
1462.11
   Front yard depth variances, see §
1298.07
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in residential districts, see §
1480.02
   Supplementary parking spaces in residential districts, see §
1294.02
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1268.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The R-1 Residential District is established in recognition of the fact that
sections of the city include low-density residential developments that are
urban in character and that contain a substantial proportion of one-family
dwellings. Among these sections of the city is land served by centralized sewer
and water, or where these utilities are readily available with adequate
capacity; land where the established use, character and density of development
would be best maintained by these regulations; and land where the general
welfare is best served by the provisions of this District in providing
essential services and facilities at an adequate level and in an efficient and
economical manner, without overcrowding the land.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1268.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Residential District:
   (a)   One-family dwellings;
   (b)   Public schools, parks and recreational facilities;
   (c)   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of the adoption of
this Zoning Code; and
   (d)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1268.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot the
building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (2)   Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development. The greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (3)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major or minor arterial thoroughfare. Access to and from the site shall be
provided by a major or minor arterial thoroughfare or service access road.
   (b)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The proposed site for any of the uses stated above shall have at
least one property line abutting a major arterial thoroughfare, and the site
shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from
the major or minor arterial thoroughfare.
      (2)   Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be at least 30 feet wide
and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass.
      (3)   Whenever the intended use includes a swimming pool, the pool shall
be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, measured above the
level of the adjoining ground. The entry to and from the pool shall be by means
of a controlled gate.
      (4)   Lighting used to illuminate the intended uses of the property shall
be shielded and arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining properties
and public streets.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
   (c)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards) when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the District in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
   (d)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35).
   (e)   A manufactured home, but with the following restrictions:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and connected to appropriate facilities.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall at no point be less than 22 feet wide
or less than 22 feet in length and shall have a total living area of at least
1,200 square feet.  These requirements are excluding garages, porches,
additions, basements or any other structure.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum 3:12 residential roof
pitch, conventional residential siding and a six-inch minimum eave overhang,
excluding appropriate guttering.
      (4)   The manufactured home must be manufactured after January 1, 1997.
(Ord. 52-99, passed 11-1-1999)
§ 1268.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1269:  R-1-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1269.01   Establishment; locations
   
1269.02   Permitted uses
   
1269.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1269.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1269.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The R-1-A Residential District is established in recognition of the fact
that sections of the city include moderate-density residential developments
that are urban in character and that contain a substantial proportion of one-
family dwellings.  Among these sections of the city is land served by
centralized sewer and water, or where these utilities are readily available
with adequate capacity; land where the established use, character and density
of development would best be maintained by these regulations; and land where
the general welfare is best served by the provisions of this district in
providing essential service and facilities at an adequate level and in an
efficient and economical manner.
(Ord. 52-2001, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 1269.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1-A Residential District:
   (a)   One-family dwellings;
   (b)   Public schools, parks and recreational facilities;
   (c)   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of
this Zoning Code; and
   (d)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01.
(Ord. 52-2001, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 1269.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot the
building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (2)   Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development.  The greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (3)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major or minor arterial thoroughfare.  Access to and from the site shall be
provided by a major or minor arterial thoroughfare or service access road.
   (b)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf course, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreational centers, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The proposed site for any uses stated above shall have at least one
property line abutting a major arterial thoroughfare, and the site shall be so
planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from the major or
minor arterial thoroughfare.
      (2)   Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be at least 30 feet wide
and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass.
      (3)   Whenever the intended use includes a swimming pool, the pool shall
be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, measured above the
level of the adjoining ground.  The entry to and from the pool shall be by
means of a controlled gate.
      (4)   Lighting used to illuminate the intended uses of the property shall
be shielded and arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining properties
and public streets.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
   (c)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards) when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
   (d)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35).
   (e)   A manufactured home, but with the following restrictions:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and connected to appropriate facilities.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall at no point be less than 22 feet wide
or less than 22 feet in length and shall have a total living area of at least
700 square feet.  These requirements are excluding garages, porches, additions,
basements or any other structure.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum 3:12 residential roof
pitch, conventional residential siding and a six-inch minimum eave overhang,
excluding appropriate uttering.
      (4)   The manufactured home must be manufactured after January 1, 1997.
(Ord. 52-2001, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 1269.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing yard setback
requirements.
(Ord. 52-2001, passed 3-18-2002)
CHAPTER 1270:  R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1270.01   Establishment; locations
   
1270.02   Permitted uses
   
1270.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1270.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Construction of service stations in residential districts, see Part Eight of
these Codified Ordinances
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in rear yards in residential districts, see §
1462.11
   Front yard depth variances, see §
1298.07
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in residential districts, see §
1480.02
   Supplementary parking spaces in residential districts, see §
1294.02
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1270.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The R-2 Residential District is established in recognition of the fact that
sections of the city include moderate-density residential developments that are
urban in character and that contain a substantial proportion of one- and two-
family dwellings. Among these sections of the city is land served by
centralized sewer and water or where these utilities are readily available with
adequate capacity; land where the established use, character and density of
development would be best maintained by these regulations; and land where the
general welfare is best served by the provisions of this District in providing
essential services and facilities at an adequate level and in an efficient and
economic manner, without overcrowding the land.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1270.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residential District:
   (a)   One-family dwellings;
   (b)   Two-family dwellings;
   (c)   Public schools, parks and recreational facilities;
   (d)   Accessory buildings and uses, as regulated in §
1296.01; and
   (e)   Automobile parking spaces, as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1270.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Cemeteries;
   (b)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot the
building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (2)   Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development. The greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (3)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major or minor arterial thoroughfare. Access to and from the site shall be
provided by a major or minor arterial thoroughfare or service access road.
   (c)   Parochial and other private elementary or intermediate schools
offering courses in general education;
   (d)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The proposed site for any of the uses stated above shall have at
least one property line abutting a major arterial thoroughfare and the site
shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from
the major or minor arterial thoroughfare.
      (2)   Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be at least 30 feet wide
and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass.
      (3)   Whenever the intended use includes a swimming pool, the pool shall
be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, measured above the
level of the adjoining ground. The entry to and from the pool shall be by means
of a controlled gate.
      (4)   Lighting used to illuminate the intended uses of the property shall
be shielded and arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining properties
and public streets.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
   (e)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards), when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the District in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
   (f)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35);
   (g)   Hospitals, nursing homes and institutional uses; and
   (h)   A manufactured home, but with the following restrictions:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and connected to appropriate facilities.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall at no point be less than 22 feet wide,
shall at no point be less than 22 feet in length and shall have a total living
area of at least 800 square feet.  These requirements are excluding garages,
porches, additions, basements or any other structure.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum 3:12 residential roof
pitch, conventional residential siding and a six-inch minimum eave overhang,
excluding appropriate guttering.
      (4)   The manufactured home must be manufactured after January 1, 1997.
(Ord. 26-98, passed 7-6-1998)
§ 1270.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1271:  R-2-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1271.01   Establishment; locations
   
1271.02   Permitted uses
   
1271.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1271.04   Area and bulk requirements
§ 1271.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The R-2-A Residential District is established in recognition of the fact
that sections of the city include moderate-density residential developments
that are urban in character and that contain a substantial proportion of one-,
two- and multiple-family dwellings. Among these sections of the city is land
served by centralized sewer and water or where these utilities are readily
available with adequate capacity; land where the established use, character and
density of development would be best maintained by these regulations; and land
where the general welfare is best served by the provisions of this district in
providing essential services and facilities at an adequate level and in an
efficient and economic manner, without overcrowding the land.
(Ord. 37-2006, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 1271.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2-A Residential District:
   (a)   One-family dwellings;
   (b)   Two-family dwellings;
   (c)   Townhouse dwellings, provided that there will be no more than six
townhouse dwellings in any contiguous group;
   (d)   Public schools, parks and recreational facilities;
   (e)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01; and
   (f)   Automobile parking spaces as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 37-2006, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 1271.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Cemeteries;
   (b)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the restrictions that apply in R-2 Residential Districts;
   (c)   Parochial and other private elementary or intermediate schools
offering courses in general education;
   (d)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the restrictions
that apply in R-2 Residential Districts;
   (e)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards), when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the immediate vicinity;
   (f)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35);
   (g)   Hospitals, nursing homes and institutional uses;
   (h)   A manufactured home, but with the following restrictions;
      (1)   The manufactured home, shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and connected appropriate facilities;
      (2)   The manufactured home shall at no point be less than 22 feet wide,
shall at no point be less than 22 feet in length and shall have a total living
area least 800 square feet. These requirements are excluding garages, porches,
additional, basements or any other structures;
      (3)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum 3:12 residential roof
pitch, conventional residential siding and a six-inch minimum eave overhang,
excluding appropriate guttering; and
      (4)   The manufactured home must be manufactured after January 1, 1997.
(Ord. 37-2006, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 1271.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 37-2006, passed 2-5-2007)
CHAPTER 1272:  R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
1272.01   Establishment; locations
   
1272.02   Permitted uses
   
1272.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1272.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Construction of service stations in residential districts, see Part Eight of
these Codified Ordinances
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in rear yards in residential districts, see §
1462.11
   Front yard depth variances, see §
1298.07
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in residential districts, see §
1480.02
   Supplementary parking spaces in residential districts, see §
1294.02
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1272.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The R-3 Residential District is established in recognition of the fact that
sections of the city include moderate-density residential developments that are
urban in character and that contain a substantial proportion of one-, two- and
multiple-family dwellings. Among these sections of the city is land served by
centralized sewer and water or where these utilities are readily available with
adequate capacity; land where the established use, character and density of
development would be best maintained by these regulations; and land where the
general welfare is best served by the provisions of this District in providing
essential services and facilities at an adequate level and in an efficient and
economic manner, without overcrowding the land.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1272.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Residential District:
   (a)   One-family dwellings;
   (b)   Two-family dwellings;
   (c)   Townhouse dwellings, provided that there will be no more than 12
townhouse dwellings in any contiguous group;
   (d)   Multiple-family dwellings, two stories or less, subject to review and
approval of a site plan by the City Planning Commission and subject to the
following:
      (1)   The proposed development shall have one property line abutting an
arterial or collector thoroughfare or the boundary line of a B-Business or I-
Industrial District.
      (2)   A 15-foot wide greenbelt, measured from the lot line, shall be
provided on those side or rear yards abutting a one-family or two-family
residential development.
      (3)   A six-foot high obscuring fence, measured from the surface of the
ground, shall be provided wherever a parking lot abuts onto lot lines on a one-
or two-family residential development. The fence or screening device shall not
have any opening, except such openings as may be required by the Fire Chief for
vehicular or emergency access to the proposed development.
   (e)   Public schools, parks and recreational facilities;
   (f)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01; and
   (g)   Automobile parking spaces as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1272.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Cemeteries;
   (b)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the restrictions that apply in R-1 Residential Districts;
   (c)   Parochial and other private elementary or intermediate schools
offering courses in general education;
   (d)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the restrictions
that apply in R-1 Residential Districts;
   (e)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards), when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the immediate vicinity;
   (f)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35);
   (g)   Hospitals, nursing homes and institutional uses;
   (h)   Funeral establishments, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The proposed site shall provide for an adequate assembly area,
furnished off the street and outside the public right-of-way, for vehicles to
be used in the funeral processions.
      (2)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot the
building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (3)   Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development. The greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (4)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major or minor arterial thoroughfare. Access to and from the site shall be
provided by a major or minor arterial thoroughfare or service access road.
   (i)   A manufactured home, but with the following restrictions:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and connected to appropriate facilities.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall at no point be less than 22 feet wide,
shall at no point be less than 22 feet in length and shall have a total living
area of at least 800 square feet.  These requirements are excluding garages,
porches, additions, basements or any other structures.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum 3:12 residential roof
pitch, conventional residential siding and a six-inch minimum eave overhang,
excluding appropriate guttering.
      (4)   The manufactured home must be manufactured after January 1, 1997.
(Ord. 32-98, passed 7-6-1998)
§ 1272.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1274:  B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
   
1274.01   Establishment; locations
   
1274.02   Permitted uses
   
1274.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1274.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in business districts, see §
1462.13
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in business districts, see §
1480.01
   Supplementary parking spaces in business districts, see §
1294.02
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1274.01  ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATIONS.
   The B-1 Neighborhood Business District is established to encourage the
grouping of small individual retail establishments to promote convenience in
serving the daily needs of persons living in adjoining residential areas. Those
groups of establishments generally occupy sites that are in close proximity to
the residential population to be served. The commercial establishments allowed
in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District will be closely associated with
residential, religious and educational land uses at the neighborhood level. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1274.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business
District:
   (a)   The following retail, personal service and business and professional
office uses, provided that a six-foot high obscuring fence is provided on those
side and rear yards abutting an R- Residential District and provided, further,
that no more than one directional advertisement oriented to each abutting road
will be permitted:
      (1)   Retail stores primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal
or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods, including:
         A.   Hardware stores;
         B.   Grocery stores;
         C.   Meat and fish markets;
         D.   Candy, nut and confectionery stores;
         E.   Dairy products stores;
         F.   Retail bakeries;
         G.   Drug and proprietary stores;
         H.   Liquor stores;
         I.   Florists;
         J.   Toy, gift and book stores; and
         K.   Pet shops.
      (2)   Personal service establishments, including:
         A.   Eating and drinking places (excluding those in the nature of a
drive-in);
         B.   Self-service laundries and dry cleaners;
         C.   Beauty shops;
         D.   Barber shops;
         E.   Shoe repair shops, shoe shine shops; and
         F.   Pressing, alteration and garment repair.
      (3)   Business and professional offices, including:
         A.   Commercial and stock savings banks;
         B.   Credit agencies;
         C.   Personal credit unions;
         D.   Insurance agents, brokers and service;
         E.   Real estate agents and brokers;
         F.   Offices of physicians and surgeons;
         G.   Offices of chiropractors;
         H.   Legal services;
         I.   Accountants; and
         J.   Tax consultants.
   (b)   Townhouse dwellings, provided that there will be no more than 12 
townhouse dwellings in any contiguous group;
   (c)   Multiple-family dwellings, three stories or less in height, subject to
the review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning Commission and
subject to the following:
      (1)   The proposed development shall have one property line abutting an
arterial thoroughfare.
      (2)   A 15-foot wide greenbelt, measured from the lot line, shall be
provided on those side or rear yards abutting a one-family or two-family
residential development. Such fence or screening devices shall not have any
opening except such openings as may be required by the Fire Chief for vehicular
or emergency access to the proposed development.
   (d)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01;
   (e)   Parking and loading as regulated in
Chapter 1294; and
   (f)   All uses permitted in the R-3 Residential District.
(Ord. 8-99, passed 6-7-1999; Ord. 38-2013, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1274.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Gasoline service stations, subject of the following conditions:
      (1)   Such stations shall be used for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor
accessories only. No repair work shall be done, including vehicle body repair,
painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, upholstering, auto glass work and
such other activities where the external effects of the activity could
adversely extend beyond the property line.
      (2)   Curb cuts for ingress and egress shall not be permitted at such
locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately
adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be not less than 20 feet from a street
intersection (measured from the intersection of the curb lines) or from
adjacent Residential Districts.
      (3)   The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet, with access
drives so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are
required to wait.
      (4)   The minimum lot width shall be at least 100 feet and pump islands
shall be set back at least 15 feet (measured from the street right-of-way
line). All buildings and other structures shall have a front yard setback of 50
feet from the street right-of-way line.
      (5)   Underground storage gasoline tanks shall be located not less than
50 feet from any R-Residential District only.
      (6)   Construction shall begin within one year from the date of approval
by the City Planning Commission.
      (7)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent R-Residential
Districts.
      (8)   Gasoline service stations shall provide a fence at least six feet
in height and a greenbelt at least ten feet in width on those side and rear lot
lines abutting an R-Residential District.
      (9)   Abandoned service stations shall be regulated as follows:
         A.   If any service station shall become abandoned, the service
station shall be presumed to be a nuisance affecting or endangering surrounding
property values and detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort or property or general welfare of the community, and shall be abated.
For purposes of this division, "abandoned" means a failure to operate the
service station for a least three consecutive months.
         B.   Whenever the Zoning Inspector finds any service station to be
abandoned within the meaning of this division, he or she shall give notice in
the same manner as a service of summons in civil cases, or by certified mail
addressed to the owner of record of the premises at his or her last known
address, or to the address to which the tax bills are sent, or by a combination
of the foregoing methods, to abate the abandoned condition within 180 days. 
Such abandoned condition shall be abated either by placing the station in
operation in accordance with this Zoning Code, adapting and using the building
for another permitted business use, or razing the service station structure,
removing the pumps and signs, abandoning the underground storage tanks in
accordance with accepted safe practice, as prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association in Appendix "C" to NFPA No. 30, under the supervision of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the city, and filling depressions to the grade
level of the lot. However, if the station is in operation at the time notice is
given and remains in operation for 90 consecutive days thereafter, the
provisions of this division shall not apply. Further, if a national emergency
should be declared, which would curtail the operation of motor vehicles, or if
the Council should determine that there exists a state of general economic
depression, the provisions of this division shall not apply.
         C.   Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner to comply with the
notice to abate the abandonment, the Zoning Inspector shall take such actions
as may be necessary to abate the nuisance.
         D.   Inoperative service stations which do not come within the
definition of abandoned service station shall be maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this Zoning Code, and the owner shall cut all grass and
remove all rubbish and weeds from the premises. The parking of motor vehicles
upon the premises shall be prohibited and the owner shall place in the window
of such service station a sign at least ten square feet in area notifying the
public of this fact. Notwithstanding the fact that any other provision or
notice is not complied with by the public, the Zoning Inspector may order the
owner of the premises on which any station is in operation for more than six
months to install fencing or a barricade which will be sufficient to block
motor vehicle access to the property.
      (10)   If rental trucks and trailers are stored on the premises, a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet shall be devoted exclusively to service
station use. The storage of rental trailers on the premises shall be provided
in addition to the minimum lot area devoted to the gasoline service station and
such storage space shall be provided behind the setback line of the main
building.
   (b)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric
transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, excluding
storage yards.
   (c)   Funeral establishments, provided that an adequate assembly area is
furnished off the street and outside the public right-of-way for vehicles to be
used in funeral processions.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1274.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1276:  B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
   
1276.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1276.02   Permitted uses
   
1276.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1276.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in business districts, see §
1462.13
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary parking spaces in business districts, see §
1294.02
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Signs in business districts, see §
1480.01
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1276.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The B-2 Central Business District is established to function as the major
retail center for the entire community. The purposes of establishing a B-
2 Central Business District (or CBD) shall be to:
   (a)   Preserve this area as the focal point of the city; and
   (b)   Prohibit uses which would detract from the primary functions of this
area. The B-2 Central Business District should be centrally located and
accessible to the population served and normally developed at the intersection
of the two arterial thoroughfares.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1276.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 Central Business District:
   (a)   All uses permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District;
   (b)   Retail stores primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of the
goods, provided that a six-foot high obscuring fence is are provided on those
side and rear yards abutting an R-Residential District. No more than one
directional advertisement oriented to each abutting road will be permitted.
      (1)   General merchandise.
         A.   Hardware stores;
         B.   Department stores;
         C.   Mail-order houses;
         D.   Limited price variety stores; and
         E.   Miscellaneous general merchandise stores.
      (2)   Food.
         A.   Grocery stores;
         B.   Meat and fish markets;
         C.   Fruit stores and vegetable markets;
         D.   Candy, nut and confectionery stores;
         E.   Dairy products stores;
         F.   Retail bakeries; and
         G.   Miscellaneous food stores.
      (3)   Apparel.
         A.   Men's and boys' clothing and furnishings;
         B.   Women's accessory and specialty stores;
         C.   Women's ready-to-wear stores;
         D.   Children's and infants' stores;
         E.   Family clothing stores;
         F.   Shoe stores;
         G.   Custom tailors;
         H.   Furriers and fur shops; and
         I.   Miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores.
      (4)   Home furnishings.
         A.   Furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores;
         B.   Household appliance stores; and
         C.   Radio, television and music stores.
      (5)   Eating and drinking places (excluding those in the nature of a
drive-in).
      (6)   Miscellaneous retail.
         A.   Drugstores and apothecary shops;
         B.   Liquor stores;
         C.   Book and stationery stores;
         D.   Sporting goods stores;
         E.   Jewelry stores;
         F.   Florists;
         G.   Camera and photographic supply stores;
         H.   Gift and novelty shops; and
         I.   Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere classified.
   (c)   Personal and consumer service.
      (1)   Photographic studios;
      (2)   Beauty shops;
      (3)   Barber shops;
      (4)   Shoe repair shops and hat cleaning shops;
      (5)   Pressing, alteration and garment repairs;
      (6)   Radio and television repair shops; and
      (7)   Miscellaneous personal services.
   (d)   Townhouse dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, subject to the
review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning Commission;
   (e)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01; and
   (f)   Parking and loading as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 39-2013, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1276.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission.
   (a)   Recreational activities:
      (1)   Motion picture theaters;
      (2)   Bowling, billiards and pool;
      (3)   Skating rinks; and
      (4)   Similar recreational activities when conducted indoors and/or
outdoors.
   (b)   Funeral establishments, provided that an adequate assembly area is
furnished off the street and outside the public right-of-way for vehicles to be
used in funeral processions; and
   (c)   Gasoline service stations, subject to the conditions detailed in
Chapter 1274.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 5-2016, passed 4-18-2016)
§ 1276.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1278:  B-3 HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
   
1278.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1278.02   Permitted uses
   
1278.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1278.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in business districts, see §
1462.13
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in business districts, see §
1480.01
   Supplementary parking spaces in business districts, see §
1294.02
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1278.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The B-3 Highway Service Business District is established and designed to
provide for uses other than those specified in the Neighborhood and Central
Business Districts. This District is designed to provide for highway service-
type facilities primarily aimed at servicing the traveling public. The District
will also permit uses which, due to their individual characteristics, would be
better located outside the primary retail center of the community.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1278.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-3 Highway Service Business
District, provided a six-foot high obscuring fence is provided on those side
and rear yards abutting an R-Residential District and provided, further, that
no more than one directional advertisement oriented to each abutting road will
be permitted:
   (a)   Gasoline service stations;
   (b)   Eating and drinking establishments;
   (c)   New and used car salesrooms or offices, service and repair shops;
   (d)   Restaurants or other places serving food or beverages and having the
characteristics of a "drive-in";
   (e)   Passenger transportation agencies and terminals;
   (f)   Indoor and outdoor recreational activities:
      (1)   Motion picture theaters;
      (2)   Swimming pools;
      (3)   Bowling, billiards and pool;
      (4)   Skating rinks; and
      (5)   Other similar activities.
   (g)   Car washes, completely enclosed;
   (h)   Other highway service business uses similar in character to the above
permitted uses; and 
   (i)   All uses permitted in the B-2 Central Business District.
(Ord. 7-99, passed 6-7-1999; Ord. 40-2013, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1278.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval by the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Outdoor sales space for the exclusive sale of new or secondhand
automobiles, house trailers, campers, manufactured homes or boats, or the
rental of any of the above, provided that the lighting thereof shall in no way
impair the safe movement of traffic or shine directly onto adjacent
properties.  The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and
dustless surface and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all
surface water. No major repair shall be done on the lot.
   (b)   Motels, provided that each sleeping unit shall contain not less than
200 square feet of floor area and that no guest shall establish a residence for
more than 60 consecutive days within any calendar year.
   (c)   Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site and sales of lawn
furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies, provided that a four- foot
high obscuring fence shall be required on any side abutting an R-Residential
District.
   (d)   Sexually oriented businesses as defined in §
1260.09, provided that the parcel of land upon which said business is located
shall be a minimum of 750 feet from a religious institution, a public or
private school, a public park or recreation area, a public building or
hospital, the property line of a residence or a lot included within a
residential district as defined in §
838.02(a)(34), a boundary of a residential or historic district as defined in §
838.02(a)(18), or 500 feet from another sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 21-95, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 29-2010, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 1278.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1280:  OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
Section
   
1280.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1280.02   Permitted uses
   
1280.03   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1280.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The Office Service District is established and designed for business office
use and services necessary for and incidental to office operations.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1280.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the OS-1 Office Service District:
   (a)   Office buildings and all operations incidental thereto;
   (b)   Printing establishments;
   (c)   Data processing operations;
   (d)   Parking and loading as required by
Chapter 1294;
   (e)   All uses permitted in B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts and CD
Conservation Districts; and
   (f)   Technical colleges, universities and state institutions of higher
education and all operations incidental thereto.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 15-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
§ 1280.03  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1282:  I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Section
   
1282.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1282.02   Permitted uses
   
1282.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1282.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in industrial districts, see §
1462.13
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in industrial districts, see §
1480.02
   Supplementary parking spaces in industrial districts, see §
1294.02
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1282.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The I-1 Light Industrial and Manufacturing District is established and
designed to allow for uses which provide repair, storage, manufacturing,
processing, wholesaling and distribution facilities which are clean, quiet and
free of hazardous or objectionable elements, such as noise, odor, dust, smoke
or glare, and which operate entirely within enclosed structures and generate
little industrial traffic. Research activities are encouraged. This District is
further designed to act as a transitional use between heavy manufacturing uses
and other less intense business and residential uses.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1282.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial and
Manufacturing District:
   (a)   Basic research, design and experimental firms, when conducted within
an enclosed building, such as pharmaceutical firms and firms dealing in
electrical instruments and devices;
   (b)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing and assembling of products
such as:
      (1)   Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries and
food products, except fish or meat products, sauerkraut, yeast and the
rendering or refining of fats or oils;
      (2)   Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, plastics, precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles,
wax, wood and yarns;
      (3)   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps and
other small rubber products; and
      (4)   Electrical and electric appliances, instruments and devices,
television sets, radios, phonographs and household appliances.
   (c)   The following uses, provided that storage is within an enclosed
building and/or outdoor storage area enclosed on all sides by an obscuring
fence or wall six feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground:
      (1)   Food and goods distribution centers, warehouses and storage
facilities;
      (2)   Motor freight garages and truck or transfer terminals and offices;
      (3)   Stone and cemetery monument works;
      (4)   Welding or other metal working shops;
      (5)   Cabinet-making, upholstering, sheet metal, plumbing, heating,
roofing, air conditioning, sign painting and other similar establishments;
      (6)   Lumberyards, including mills; and
      (7)   Cold storage plants, creamery and bottling plants.
   (d)   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated in §
1296.01; and
   (e)   Parking and loading as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1282.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Gasoline service stations, subject to the restrictions set forth in
Chapter 1274;
   (b)   Eating establishments; and
   (c)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship,
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that the front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot
the building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (2)   Wherever an off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development. Said greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (3)   Lighting used to illuminate the intended uses of the property shall
be shielded and arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining properties.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 60-2000, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 23-2012,
passed 11-5-2012)
§ 1282.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1284:  I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Section
   
1284.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1284.02   Permitted uses
   
1284.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1284.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Fences in industrial districts, see §
1462.13
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Signs in industrial districts, see §
1480.02
   Supplementary parking spaces in industrial districts, see §
1294.02
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, See R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1284.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The I-2 Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing District is established and
designed to accommodate light and heavy industrial uses in the fields of
repair, storage, manufacturing, processing, wholesaling, distribution and
fabricating, including large scale specialized industrial operations, whose
external physical characteristics may in some degree affect surrounding
Residential and Business Districts. The uses listed are intended to provide for
the full range of industrial activities, but because of certain objectionable
characteristics should be placed in separate districts.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1284.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 Heavy Industrial and
Manufacturing District:
   (a)   All uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial and Manufacturing
District; and
   (b)   The following uses, provided that storage is within an enclosed
building or an outdoor storage area enclosed on all sides by an obscuring fence
or wall six feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground:
      (1)   Building materials, sale yards and lumberyards, including mill
work;
      (2)   Contractors' equipment, storage yard or plant, or storage and
rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;
      (3)   Food and goods distribution centers, warehouses and storage
facilities;
      (4)   Motor freight garages and truck or transfer terminals and offices;
      (5)   Stone and cemetery monument works employing power-drive tools;
      (6)   Repair services for machinery and equipment, including repair
garages and specialty establishments, such as motor, body and fender and
radiator repairs, tune-ups and tire repairs, sales and services, including
vulcanizing;
      (7)   Welding or other metal-working shops;
      (8)   Cabinet-making, upholstering, sheet metal, plumbing, heating,
roofing, air conditioning, sign painting and other similar establishments;
      (9)   Foundry casting of light-weight nonferrous metals, not causing
noxious fumes or odors; and
      (10)   Laundry, cleaning and dyeing plants.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1284.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the provisions of §
1262.05 and to the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Acetylene manufacture;
   (b)   Acid manufacture, except sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric, carbolic,
hydrochloric or other corrosive manufacture;
   (c)   Ammonia, chloride or bleaching powder;
   (d)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris;
   (e)   Starch or glucose manufacture;
   (f)   Disinfectant, insecticide or poisonous substances;
   (g)   Explosives manufacture or storage, except for small arms ammunition;
   (h)   Felt manufacture;
   (i)   Fertilizer, compost manufacture or storage;
   (j)   Garbage, offal, dead animals, refuse, incineration, reduction or
storage;
   (k)   Glue manufacture;
   (l)   Hair or hair dyeing products manufacture;
   (m)   Lime or lime products;
   (n)   Match manufacture;
   (o)   Petroleum or inflammable liquid production, refining and storage;
   (p)   Radium extraction operations; and
   (q)   Tar distillation and manufacture.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1284.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1286:  MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
Section
   
1286.01   Establishment; purpose
   
1286.02   Permitted uses
   
1286.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1286.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Manufactured home parks, see R.C. Ch. 3733
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1286.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   (a)   (1)   The MHP Manufactured Home Park District, which is a Special
District in the city, is established in recognition of the fact that there are
special uses which should be accommodated in the community, but which, due to
their nature, are not entirely compatible with uses permitted in the standard
districts.
      (2)   The MHP Manufactured Home Park District is established in
recognition of manufactured homes which are of such a nature as to warrant
individual consideration and regulation due to the unique demands they place
upon the public health and welfare and the requirements of location and
development that generally are peculiar to these uses.
   (b)   It is the intent of this chapter to allow manufactured homes to be
suitably located and developed in unified areas having all necessary services
and facilities comprehensively provided in accordance with a predetermined site
plan. To this end the site development and landscape design principles of the
MHP Manufactured Home Park District, together with the provisions of associated
park and recreational facilities, shall be an important consideration in
achieving an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability that
will promote stability, order and efficiency of the residential area.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1286.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the MHP Manufactured Home Park
District:
   (a)   Manufactured home park developments, which shall comply with the
requirements of O.A.C. Chapter 4781, promulgated by the Ohio Public Health
Council in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4781, and subject, further, to the
review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning Commission.
      (1)   The manufactured home park shall provide a six-foot high obscuring
fence and a greenbelt at least 12 feet in width on those side or rear yards of
the manufactured home park which abut a residential, business or industrial
district.
      (2)   All points of ingress and egress shall be located no closer than
400 feet from any intersection, measured from the street right-of-way lines.
      (3)   All structures and activity areas shall be located at least 40 feet
from the front property line.
      (4)   Proposed manufactured home parks shall have one property line
abutting an arterial or collector thoroughfare. Access to and from the site
shall be provided by the thoroughfare.
      (5)   The manufactured home park shall further comply with any other
regulations of the Ohio Manufactured Home Commission and any other ordinances
of the city.
      (6)   Each manufactured home or mobile home lot in the manufactured home
park shall be served by approved city sewer and water facilities.
      (7)   Sufficient space shall be provided on the manufactured home park
site for storage of manufactured homes or mobile homes vacated for more than a
30-day period, except due to temporary leave of absence. The storage area shall
be provided with an obscuring screen. The area used for storage of manufactured
homes or mobile homes shall be exclusive of any parks, public spaces or rights-
of-way of interior roads, and that space shall not be used for the sale and
service of manufactured homes or mobile homes.
   (b)   Accessory uses as regulated in §
1296.01;
   (c)   Automobile parking spaces as regulated in
Chapter 1294; and
   (d)   Manufactured homes or mobile homes on platted single lots fronting on
dedicated public streets served by approved city sewer and water facilities.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 62-2000, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 11-2013,
passed 8-5-2013)
§ 1286.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05 and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Churches and other buildings for the purposes of religious worship,
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §
1266.13 may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yard setback by one foot for each one foot the
building exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (2)   Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land developed
for one-family and two-family residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring
year-round greenbelt six feet in height shall be provided along the sides of
the parking area adjacent to the residential development. The greenbelt shall
be further subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1296.
      (3)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting an
arterial thoroughfare as designated on the Comprehensive Plan. Access to and
from the site shall be provided by an arterial thoroughfare or a service access
road.
   (b)   Parochial and other private elementary or intermediate schools
offering courses in general education;
   (c)   Private recreational areas, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis clubs
and institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The proposed site for any of the uses stated above shall have at
least one property line abutting a major arterial thoroughfare and the site
shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from
the major or minor arterial thoroughfare.
      (2)   Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be at least 30 feet wide
and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass.
      (3)   Whenever the intended use includes a swimming pool, the pool shall
be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, measured above the
level of the adjoining ground. The entry to and from the pool shall be by means
of a controlled gate.
      (4)   Lighting used to illuminate the intended uses of the property shall
be shielded and arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining properties
and public streets.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
Chapter 1294.
   (d)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards), when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity; and
   (e)   Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35).
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1286.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1288:  CD CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Section
   
1288.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1288.02   Permitted uses
   
1288.03   Conditionally permitted uses
   
1288.04   Area and bulk requirements
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1288.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The CD Conservation District, which is a Special District in the city, is
established in recognition of the fact that there are special uses which should
be accommodated in the community, but which, due to their nature, are not
entirely compatible with uses permitted in the standard districts, and to
provide for agricultural uses and open space within outlying parts of the city.
The object of the regulations in this District is to encourage agricultural and
conservation uses and to discourage any other development.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1288.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the CD Conservation District:
   (a)   Single-family dwellings;
   (b)   Agriculture, including dairying, farming, pasturage, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry;
   (c)   Recreational uses privately or governmentally owned and/or operated
for archery, boating, fishing, golfing and swimming, including public and
private country clubs, riding stables and similar uses consistent with the
rural character of the area; and
   (d)   Water conservation uses, including water supply works, flood control
and water protection works, fish and game hatcheries and preserves, and other
uses similar in character to the above specified uses.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1288.03  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use, the provisions of §
1262.05, and the review and approval of the City Planning Commission:
   (a)   Cemeteries, subject to statutory limitations and further subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   All structures and activity areas shall be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (2)   All points of ingress and egress should be located no closer than
200 feet from the intersection of two major arterial thoroughfares and no
closer than 100 feet from the intersection of a major arterial thoroughfare
with a minor, collector or local thoroughfare.
      (3)   Points of ingress and egress shall be available only from abutting
major arterial, minor arterial or collector thoroughfares and shall not be
available from any local thoroughfare.
   (b)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding storage
yards), when operating requirements necessitate the location of the buildings
and uses within the District in order to serve the immediate vicinity;
   (c)   Gas and oil wells, subject to the condition that all permitted
installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition so as to prevent
injury to any single property, individual or part of the community as a whole;
and
   (d)   Home occupations, subject to the restrictions set forth in §
1260.09(b)(35).
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1288.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
1266.13 for provisions limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum
lot size and the maximum density permitted, and establishing minimum yard
setback requirements.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1290:  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
1290.01   Establishment; purposes
   
1290.02   Permitted uses
   
1290.03   Procedure for approval
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned Unit Development Districts, see §
1266.02
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1290.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES.
   The Planned Unit Development District is established to provide flexibility
in the arrangement and design of residential dwellings, to encourage developers
to use a more creative approach in development and to achieve:
   (a)   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of
housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
   (b)   A more useful pattern of open space and recreational areas and, if
permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses and services;
   (c)   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography
and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and which
prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
   (d)   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development, resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
   (e)   A development pattern in harmony with the land use density,
transportation facilities and community facilities objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1290.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Planned Unit Development
District:
   (a)   Residential dwelling types developed in a unified manner in accordance
with an approved plan;
   (b)   Schools, parks and playfield facilities;
   (c)   Churches and other institutions for the purpose of religious worship;
   (d)   Recreational facilities and amenities as may be provided for the use
of the residents of the dwellings; and
   (e)   Neighborhood shopping centers not comprising more than 10% of the
total site acreage and developed in a united manner.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1290.03  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
   (a)   In general.  Planned Unit Development Districts may be established by
application in accordance with the provisions set forth below. The procedure
and conditions for establishing a Planned Unit Development District shall be as
set forth in division (b) hereof.
   (b)   Application procedure. Any application for a planned unit development,
for any land use or structure permitted under this Zoning Code, shall be
submitted in accordance with the following procedure:
      (1)   Preapplication meeting. The developer/ landowner shall meet with
the Zoning Inspector and the City Planning Commission prior to the submission
of the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss
early and informally the purpose and effect of this Zoning Code and the
criteria and standards herein and to familiarize the developer/landowner with
the Comprehensive Plan, the Thoroughfare Plan, the Parks and Transportation
Plan and the drainage, sewer and water systems of the city.
      (2)   Contents of application for approval of preliminary development
plan. An application for preliminary planned unit development shall be filed
with the Chairperson of the City Planning Commission by at least one owner or
lessee of property for which the planned unit development is proposed.
         A.   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information filed in triplicate:
            1.   The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
            2.   The name, address and phone number of the registered surveyor,
registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the
preliminary development plan;
            3.   A legal description of the property;
            4.   A description of the existing use;
            5.   The zoning district(s);
            6.   A vicinity map, at a scale approved by the City Planning
Commission, showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and
such other items as the City Planning Commission may require to show the
relationship of the planned unit development to the Comprehensive Plan and to
existing schools and other community facilities and services;
            7.   A preliminary development plan, at a scale approved by the
City Planning Commission, showing topography at two-foot intervals; the
location and type of residential, commercial and industrial land uses; the
layout dimensions and names of existing and proposed streets, rights-of-way,
utility easements, parks and community spaces; the layout and dimensions of
lots and building setback lines; preliminary improvement drawings showing
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas; and such other
characteristics as the City Planning Commission deems necessary;
            8.   A proposed schedule for the development of the site;
            9.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the
land in question to initiate the proposed development plan within five years;
            10.   A fee as indicated in §
1262.08.
         B.   The application for preliminary planned unit development shall be
accompanied by a written statement by the developer/landowner setting forth the
reasons why, in his or her opinion, the planned unit development would be in
the public interest and would be consistent with the city's statement of
purpose for planned unit developments in §
1290.01.
      (3)   Public hearing after receipt of preliminary development plan.
         A.   Within 30 days after receipt of the preliminary development plan,
the City Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing.
         B.   Before holding said public hearing, notice of the hearing shall
be given, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city, at
least 20 days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall set forth the
time and place of the public hearing and a general description of the proposed
planned unit development.
         C.   Before holding this public hearing, written notice of the hearing
shall be sent by the Chairperson of the City Planning Commission by first-class
mail, at least 20 days before the hearing, to all owners of property contiguous
to or directly across the street from the area proposed to be included within
the Planned Unit Development District. The failure to deliver the notice, as
provided in this section, shall not invalidate any such approval. The notice
shall contain the same information as required of notices published in
newspapers as previously specified.
      (4)   Approval in principle by City Planning Commission. Within 30 days
after the required public hearing, the City Planning Commission shall review
the preliminary development plan to determine if it is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this Zoning Code, whether the proposed development
advances the general welfare of the neighborhood and community, and whether the
benefits, combination of various land uses, and the interrelationship with the
land uses in the surrounding area, justify the deviation from standard district
regulations. The Commission's approval in principle of the preliminary
development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final
development plan. Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
The City Planning Commission may seek assistance from the Richland County
Regional Planning Commission in making its recommendation.
      (5)   Submission of final development plan. After approval in principle
of the preliminary development plan, the developer shall submit a final
development plan to the City Planning Commission. The final development plan
shall be in general conformity with the preliminary development plan approved
in principle. Five copies of the final development plan shall be submitted and
may be endorsed by a qualified professional team, which should include an urban
planner, a licensed architect, a registered land surveyor, a registered civil
engineer and a registered landscape architect.
      (6)   Contents of application for approval of final development plan. An
application for approval of the final development plan shall be filed with the
Chairperson of the City Planning Commission by at least one owner or lessee of
the property for which the planned unit development is proposed. Each
application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and
exactness of all information supplied on the application for the final
development plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall
expire and may be revoked if construction on the project has not begun within
five years from the date of issuance of the approval. At a minimum, the
application shall contain the following information:
         A.   A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions
and bearings of the property lines, the area in acres, the topography and
existing features of the development site, including major wooded areas,
structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses; 
         B.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan;
the location and sizes of lots; the location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity; and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
         C.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulations of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type of housing; the
estimated nonresidential population; the anticipated timing for each unit; and
standards for height, open space, building density and public improvements
proposed for each unit of the development whenever the application proposes an
exception from the standard zoning districts of other ordinances governing
development;
         D.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans, sealed and certified
by a registered professional engineer, showing, as necessary, water, sewer and
drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste disposal
facilities; street improvements; and the nature and extent of earthwork
required for site preparation and development;
         E.   The site plan, showing buildings, various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationships;
         F.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
         G.   Landscaping plans;
         H.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal
statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and
maintenance of the land and the improvements thereon, including those areas
which are to be commonly owned and maintained; and
         I.   A fee as indicated in §
1262.08.
      (7)   Public hearing by City Planning Commission after receipt of final
development plan. Within 30 days after submission of the final development
plan, the City Planning Commission may hold a public hearing. If a second
public hearing is held, notice shall be given as previously specified.
      (8)   Recommendation by City Planning Commission. Within 60 days after
receipt of the final development plan, the City Planning Commission shall
recommend to the City Council that the final development plan be approved as
presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved. The City
Planning Commission shall then transmit all papers constituting the record and
the recommendations to the City Council.
      (9)   Criteria for recommendations by City Planning Commission. Before
making its recommendations as required, the City Planning Commission shall find
that the facts submitted with the application and presented at the public
hearing establish that:
         A.   The proposed development can be initiated within five years of
the date of approval;
         B.   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability, or that adequate assurance
will be provided that the objective will be attained, and that the uses
proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but
will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under standard
district regulations. 
         C.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate
to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic
in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the planned unit
development;
         D.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
location proposed;
         E.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the City
Planning Commission and the City Council;
         F.   The area surrounding the development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
         G.   The planned unit development is in general conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan of the city; and
         H.   1.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for
the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
            2.   The City Planning Commission may seek assistance from the
Richland County Regional Planning Commission in making its recommendations.
      (10)   Action by City Council. Within 60 days after receipt of the final
recommendation of the City Planning Commission, the City Council shall, by
ordinance, either approve, approve with supplementary conditions or disapprove
the application as presented. If the application is either approved or approved
with conditions, the City Council shall direct the Zoning Inspector to issue
zoning certificates only in accordance with the approved final development plan
and the supplementary conditions, if any. 
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1292:  NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND BUILDINGS
Section
   
1292.01   Purposes
   
1292.02   General provisions
   
1292.03   Repairs; maintenance; construction
   
1292.04   Nonconforming use certificates
   
1292.05   Status of special exceptions and conditional uses
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming use certificates, see Title 6, Zoning
Appx. V
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
   Retroactive zoning ordinances prohibited; nonconforming uses, see R.C. §
713.15
§ 1292.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the eventual and equitable
elimination of lots, uses of land and structures which do not conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Code but which were in operation prior to the
enactment of this Zoning Code. Nonconforming lots, uses of land and structures
are declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses of the district
involved. It is further the purpose of this chapter that nonconforming lots,
uses of land and structures shall not be enlarged upon, extended or used as a
basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited in the same district.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1292.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Nonconforming lots. In any one-family or multiple-family district,
one-family and two-family dwellings may be erected on any single lot of record
existing on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code,
even though the lot fails to meet the requirements for area and width, or both,
that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions
and other requirements not involving the area and width of the lot conform to
the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. The Board of
Zoning Appeals may grant a variance where the strict application of the
provisions of this Zoning Code would result in practical or unnecessary
hardship in complying with the minimum yard requirements for the district in
which the lots are located.
   (b)   Nonconforming uses of land. The lawful use of any land existing on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code may be continued
although the use does not conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code,
provided that the following provisions are met:
      (1)   A.   A nonconforming use shall not be extended, enlarged or
increased to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective
date of this Zoning Code, with the following exceptions:
            1.   A manufactured home existing as a nonconforming use may be
replaced by a larger manufactured home, provided that all setback requirements
for that district are in compliance.
            2.   An existing conditional use church, in a residential
neighborhood, not located on a major or minor arterial thoroughfare, may be
extended or expanded to occupy a greater area of land, provided that all
setback requirements for that district are in compliance.
         B.   The extension of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming
structure which existed prior to the enactment of this Zoning Code shall not be
deemed to be the extension of the nonconforming use. However, a nonconforming
use may be extended, enlarged or increased to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied on the effective date of this Zoning Code in the event the
same is required by law.
      (2)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of
two years or more, the discontinuance shall be considered as conclusive
evidence of an intention to abandon legally the nonconforming use. At the end
of the two-year period, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Code for the district in which the land is located.
      (3)   Nonconforming uses existing and established after the effective
date of this Zoning Code shall be declared illegal nonconforming uses and shall
be discontinued no more than 20 days following the date of inspection of the
use.
      (4)   A nonconforming use destroyed or damaged by fire, collapse,
explosion or acts of nature, to the extent of 100% of its replacement cost,
exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, may be reconstructed
and the nonconforming use continued although the use does not conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Code, subject to the following conditions:
         A.   The reconstruction of a nonconforming use shall not be extended,
enlarged or increased to occupy greater lot coverage than was occupied on the
effective date of this Zoning Code.
         B.   Reconstruction shall begin on a nonconforming use within one year
from the date the nonconforming use was destroyed or damaged by fire, collapse,
explosion or acts of nature.
   (c)   Nonconforming structures. A lawful structure existing on the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code may be continued although the
structure does not conform to the area, height or yard provisions of this
Zoning Code, provided that the following provisions are met:
      (1)   A nonconforming structure may not be altered or enlarged in a
manner which increases its nonconformity.
      (2)   A nonconforming structure destroyed or damaged by fire, collapse,
explosion or acts of nature, to the extent of 100% of its replacement cost,
exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, may be reconstructed
and the nonconforming structure continued although the structure does not
conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code, subject to the following
conditions:
         A.   The reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall not be
extended, enlarged or increased to occupy greater lot coverage than was
occupied on the effective date of this Zoning Code.
         B.    Reconstruction shall begin on a nonconforming structure within
one year from the date the nonconforming structure was destroyed or damaged by
fire, collapse, explosion or acts of nature.
      (3)   Should the structure be moved or transported for any reason and for
any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the provisions for the
district in which it is located after it is removed.
   (d)   Nonconforming uses of structures and land. The lawful use of a
structure or of a structure and land, existing on the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, may be continued although the use
does not conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code, providing that the
following provisions are met:
      (1)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination
has been discontinued for six consecutive months, or for 18 months during any
three-year period, the structure and premises in combination shall not be re-
established or used except in conformity with the provisions of the district in
which it is located.
      (2)   Any nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restrictive
classification than the existing nonconforming use by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. In permitting such a change, the Board may require that the more
restrictive nonconforming use meet certain conditions and requirements in
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
      (3)   Where a nonconforming structure and use exist, the removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the
land.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 30-2007, passed 9-17-2007; Ord. 20-2016,
passed 10-3-2016)
§ 1292.03  REPAIRS; MAINTENANCE; CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration
to a safe condition of any building or structure or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the general health, safety and
public welfare of the community.
   (b)   Ordinary repairs and the replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing may be done on any building or part thereof devoted to a
nonconforming use, provided that the cubic content of the building as it
existed on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code
shall not be increased.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the completion or construction
and use of a nonconforming building for which a zoning certificate has been
issued prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning
Code, provided that construction is commenced within 30 days after the issuance
of the certificate, and that the entire building or structure shall have been
completed within one year from the date the zoning certificate was issued.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1292.04  NONCONFORMING USE CERTIFICATES. 
   Within one year after the enactment of this Zoning Code, an owner of any
nonconforming use (at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code) shall apply
to the Zoning Inspector for a nonconforming use certificate and the Zoning
Inspector shall issue the certificate without charge.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1292.05  STATUS OF SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CONDITIONAL USES.
   Where a special exception or conditional use certificate has been granted
for any use, as provided in this Zoning Code, the use shall not be classified
as a nonconforming use within the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1294:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
   
1294.01   General space requirements
   
1294.02   Supplementary space requirements
   
1294.03   Design and construction of parking lots
   
1294.04   Off-street loading and unloading
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Parking generally, see
Ch. 452
   Parking in public parks, see §
1062.05
   Parking in yards, see §
1490.14
   Parking of bicycles, see §
444.08
   Parking of trailers, see §
1492.02
   Parking on city reservoir property, see §
1064.08
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1294.01  GENERAL SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   In all districts, except the B-2 Central Business District, in conjunction
with the erection or enlargement of any building or structure, off-street
parking space shall be provided with adequate access to each space. In
connection with all permitted uses, off-street parking space shall be provided
before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, and, further, shall be
constructed in accordance with the following regulations:
   (a)   General regulations.
      (1)   Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never
be converted, changed or occupied by another building, structure or use of land
until equal off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere.
      (2)   Land area designated for off-street parking facilities shall be
used solely for the parking of vehicles, and no commercial repair work, storage
or service of any kind shall be conducted on all or any part of the parking
lot.
      (3)   Any use not specifically mentioned herein shall provide minimum
off-street parking facilities in accordance with the requirements established
for a use which is similar in type and nature.
      (4)   In computing the number of parking spaces required by this chapter,
fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number.
   (b)   Minimum number of off-street spaces required.
      (1)   A.   Residential uses:
            1.   One- and two-family dwellings: two per dwelling unit;
            2.   Multiple-family dwellings: two per dwelling unit;
            3.   Townhouse dwellings: two per dwelling unit; and
            4.   Home occupation involving incoming vehicles: three per
dwelling unit.
         B.   Parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings housing elderly
persons may be reduced to one and one-half per dwelling unit.
      (2)   Manufactured home parks: two for each manufactured home site and
one for each employee of the manufactured home park.
      (3)   Business uses:
         A.   Beauty parlors or barber shops: three for each beauty or barber
chair;
         B.   Establishments for sale and consumption of beverages, food or
refreshments on the premises: one for each 100 square feet of usable floor
area, and five times this amount if the establishment is in the nature of a
"drive-in";
         C.   Furniture stores, appliance stores, hardware stores, showrooms
for an electrician, carpenter, shoe repair and other similar uses: three for
each 800 square feet of usable floor area plus one for each two employees;
         D.   Planned shopping centers: three and one-half for every 1,000
square feet of gross building area;
         E.   Retail stores, supermarkets, bakeries and the like: one for each
300 square feet of usable floor area;
         F.   Indoor movie theaters: one for each three seats plus one for each
two employees;
         G.   Bowling alleys: five for each bowling alley plus one for each
employee plus three for each 100 square feet of usable floor area;
         H.   Dance halls, skating rinks, private clubs, and other assembly
halls without fixed seats: one for each two persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load;
         I.   Funeral homes and mortuary establishments: one for each 50 square
feet of floor area in slumber rooms, parlors or service rooms; and
         J.   Hotels and motels: one for each one sleeping room and one for
each employee.
      (4)   Office uses:
         A.   Banks, savings and loan companies: one for each 100 square feet
of usable floor area;
         B.   Business offices or professional offices, except those
professional offices listed in division (b)(4)C. hereof: one for each 300
square feet of usable floor area; and
         C.   Doctors and dentists' offices: one for each 100 square feet of
usable floor area in the waiting room and one for each examining room and
dental chair.
      (5)   Industrial uses:
         A.   Industrial, research and storage establishments: one per employee
in the largest working shift; and
         B.   Wholesale establishments: five plus one for every one employee in
the largest working shift.
      (6)   Institutional and recreational uses:
         A.   Auditorium, stadium, exhibition hall and assembly, or similar
uses: one for each three seats or six feet of benches, plus one for each
employee;
         B.   Business and technical schools: one for each one teacher,
employee and administrator, plus one for every two students;
         C.   Churches and temples: one for each three seats based on the
maximum seating capacity as determined by the State or local Fire Marshal;
         D.   Convalescent homes and children's homes: one for each three beds,
plus one for each employee;
         E.   Elementary and junior high schools: one for each one teacher,
employee or administrator, plus the minimum requirements stated for an
auditorium in division (b)(6)A. hereof;
         F.   Golf courses other than a miniature par-3 golf course: four for
each hole or green, plus one for every one employee;
         G.   Miniature par-3 golf courses and driving ranges: two for each
hole or two for each "tee shot" area;
         H.   Billiard parlors and sports or amusement centers: three for each
200 square feet of usable floor area;
         I.   Hospitals and nurses training schools: one for each one bed and
one for each employee and doctor registered with the hospital;
         J.   Private and municipal swimming pools, tennis clubs or other
similar uses: one individual space for each two member-families or individuals;
and
         K.   Senior high schools: one for each one teacher, employee and
administrator and one for every 50 students, plus the minimum requirements
stated in division (b)(6)A. hereof for an auditorium.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1294.02  SUPPLEMENTARY SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   R-Residential Districts.
      (1)   In one- and two-family residential developments the required number
of off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building
which they are intended to serve.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwelling units (including townhouses) shall be
required to meet the following off-street parking regulations:
         A.   No more than 35% of the area of any required yard or any required
minimum distance between buildings shall be devoted to off-street parking
drives, aisles and maneuvering lands.
         B.   Ingress and egress to a parking lot within a multiple-family
development shall not be across land developed for one- and two-family
residential purposes.
         C.   Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot
shall be located at least 40 feet away from adjacent property lines located in
a one- or two-family residential development.
   (b)   Business Districts.
      (1)   Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy part of the front
yard after the parking plan layout, drives and aisles have been reviewed and
approved by the City Planning Commission. A minimum front yard setback of ten
feet, exclusive of drives and aisles and measured from the nearest point of the
off-street parking area and the nearest point of the street right-of-way line,
shall be maintained.
      (2)   Off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or
within 200 feet of the building they are intended to serve. The maximum
distance of 200 feet shall be measured from the nearest point of the building
to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot.
      (3)   Ingress and egress to parking lots or loading areas within a B-
Business District shall not intersect with local residential streets abutting
residential properties.
   (c)   Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Parking shall be permitted within the side and rear yards. The
layout of drives, aisles and maneuvering lanes shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Planning Commission.
      (2)   Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for
industrial purposes shall not intersect with local residential streets abutting
residential properties.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1294.03  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING LOTS.
   Whenever the off-street parking regulations set forth in §§
1294.01 and
1294.02 require the construction of an off-street parking facility, the parking
lots shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following regulations:
   (a)   Plans for the design of off-street parking facilities shall be
prepared in accordance with the minimum requirements stated in the following
schedule:
 
Parking Angle Base Parking Width (ft.) Space Length (ft.) Maneuvering at Lane
Line (degrees)                                            Width (ft.)
45                 8-1/3               20                 16
60                 8-1/2               20                 20
90                 9                   20                 24
 
   (b)   Access into all parking spaces shall be through means of maneuvering
lanes. Backing directly from a parking space onto a street is prohibited.
   (c)   Parking areas shall be of usable shape improved with bituminous,
concrete or other suitable surfacing material, and graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation.
   (d)   All lighting used to illuminate such parking areas shall be arranged
so as to direct the light away from adjoining properties or streets, and no
open sources, such as floodlights or the stringing of light bulbs, shall be
permitted.
   (e)   Entrance and exit driveways shall be clearly limited and adequately
defined according to standards approved by the engineer of jurisdiction.
   (f)   Parking lots in B-Business or I-Industrial Districts which abut any R-
Residential District shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring fence
six feet in height, measured from the surface of the parking lot. Such fence
shall be provided where the side or rear lot lines abut onto a residential
district or on those sides facing the residential district only.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1294.04  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   Adequate space for the standing, loading or unloading of motor vehicles
involving the distribution of materials or merchandise shall be provided on
every lot in connection with every building or structure in order to avoid
undue interference with the public use of dedicated rights-of-way. This
requirement shall not be applicable to the B-2 Central Business District. Such
space shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations:
   (a)   All spaces shall be laid out in dimensions of at least ten feet by 50
feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 15 feet in
height.
   (b)   Loading dock approaches shall be provided with pavement having an
asphaltic or portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and
dustless surface.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 1296:  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section
   
1296.01   Accessory buildings and uses
   
1296.02   Temporary buildings
   
1296.03   Imposition of conditions by City Planning Commission
   
1296.04   Sewer and water facilities
   
1296.05   Approval of subdivision plats; lot dimensions
   
1296.06   Drainage channels
   
1296.07   Principal buildings; minimum frontage
   
1296.08   Front yard setbacks for corner lots
   
1296.09   Calculation of yard and open space requirements
   
1296.10   Water well or septic tank systems
   
1296.11   Public and private access requirements; street improvement standards
   
1296.12   Materials for greenbelts and planting strips
   
1296.13   Screening devices; fences and masonry walls
   
1296.14   Corner clearance
   
1296.15   Landfill and dumping operations
   
1296.16   Signs
   
1296.17   Cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana is
prohibited in all zoning districts
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   General exceptions, see
Ch. 1298
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1296.01  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   Accessory buildings and uses, as permitted in this Zoning Code, shall be
subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   An accessory building attached to the principal building shall comply
with the requirements of this Zoning Code applicable to the main building.
   (b)   Detached accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 10% of any
required yard, except the rear yard.
   (c)   Detached accessory buildings shall be located in the rear not less
than five feet from any required side or rear lot line.
   (d)   Within an R District no accessory building shall exceed one story or
20 feet in height.
   (e)   Accessory buildings located on a corner lot shall not be permitted to
project beyond the minimum front yard depth facing both streets.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.02  TEMPORARY BUILDINGS.
   Temporary nonresidential buildings for uses incidental to construction work
shall be permitted for a period not to exceed two years. Temporary residential
buildings for uses incidental to construction work shall be permitted for a
period not to exceed six months. A separate zoning certificate shall be
required for such temporary buildings. If hardship occurs, an extension may be
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to §
1264.06.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.03  IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS BY CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning Commission, with the approval of City Council, shall have
the power to impose conditions to safeguard the intent and objectives of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.04  SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES.
   Sewer and water facilities shall comply with the city's current Sanitary
Code and water regulations and all health and safety ordinances.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.05  APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS; LOT DIMENSIONS.
   No proposed plat of a new subdivision shall hereafter be approved unless the
lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum lot area and width
requirements set forth in the various districts of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.06  DRAINAGE CHANNELS.
   Drainage channels that exist within the city are essential for the
maintenance of the health and general welfare of the people. Any encroachment
upon filling or the destruction of channels is a violation of this Zoning Code.
In order to provide for the development of property for its best use, the
engineer of jurisdiction, subject to the approval of the City Planning
Commission, shall decide what facilities are adequate to maintain the primary
purpose of the drainage channel.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.07  PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS; MINIMUM FRONTAGE.
   In R-1 and R-2 Districts, no more than one principal building shall be
permitted on any one lot. No dwelling, building or structure shall be erected
or placed on a lot which does not abut one public street for at least 60 feet
of frontage.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.08  FRONT YARD SETBACKS FOR CORNER LOTS.
   Corner lots in all districts are required to meet the minimum front yard
setbacks, facing both streets, as indicated in the particular district.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.09  CALCULATION OF YARD AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   No space which, for a proposed building or dwelling group, has been counted
or calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard or other open space
required by this Zoning Code, may, by reason of change in ownership or
otherwise, be counted or calculated to satisfy the yard or open space
requirements of or for any other building or dwelling group.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.10  WATER WELL OR SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS.
   Where individual water well or septic tank systems are provided, no building
certificate or zoning certificate shall be issued without documentary evidence
that the city Division of Health has approved the proposed sanitary sewage
disposal system for which the building certificate or zoning certificate has
been requested. If a sanitary sewer is available, no septic tanks will be
permitted.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.11  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; STREET IMPROVEMENT
STANDARDS.
   Every dwelling shall be located on a lot having frontage on a public or
private street. Public and private streets shall be designed at least in
accordance with minimum improvement standards for public streets as specified
in the Subdivision Regulations of the city. All multiple-family developments
designed to be serviced by private streets shall be approved by the engineer of
jurisdiction and shall meet the minimum improvement standards established for
public streets.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.12  MATERIALS FOR GREENBELTS AND PLANTING STRIPS.
   Whenever, in this Zoning Code, a greenbelt or planting strip is required, it
shall be planted within one year from the date of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant
materials to provide a screen to abutting properties. Suitable plant materials
shall be provided in accordance with the following:
   (a)   Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet from the
property line; and
   (b)   Where plant materials are planted in two or more rows, plantings shall
be staggered.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.13  SCREENING DEVICES; FENCES AND MASONRY WALLS.
   (a)   Fences are permitted subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1462.
   (b)   Masonry walls and fences shall be provided and maintained in any B
Business or I Industrial District and on those sides abutting an R-Residential
District in conformity with the following regulations:
      (1)   No fence or wall shall be extended toward the front lot line beyond
the front of the principal building or structure or the required minimum front
yard setback, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Required fences and walls shall be located on the property line,
except where the fence or wall interferes with underground utility or surface
water drainage conditions.
      (3)   The walls or fences may be constructed with openings which do not,
in any square section (i.e., height and width), exceed 20% of the total
surface. Where walls or fences are pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as
to maintain the obscuring character required. The arrangement of the openings
shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector.
      (4)   All fences and walls shall be constructed of materials approved by
the Building Inspector to be durable, weather-resistant, rustproof and easily
maintained.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.14  CORNER CLEARANCE.
   No fence, wall, greenbelt, planting strip or other obstruction to vision,
above a height of two feet from the established street grade, shall be
permitted within the  triangular area at the intersection of any street right-
of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet, measured from their
point of intersection.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.15  LANDFILL AND DUMPING OPERATIONS.
   The use of land for filling or dumping of earth, sand, gravel and decayed or
decomposed waste materials, not in connection with general farming,
agriculture, horticulture or landscape activities, shall comply with the
provisions of all other ordinances of the city relevant thereto.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.16  SIGNS.
   Signs and other outdoor display structures are permitted subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 1480.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1296.17  CULTIVATION, PROCESSING, OR RETAIL DISPENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA
IS PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The cultivation, manufacture, or retail dispensing of medical
marijuana shall be a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the City of
Shelby.
   (b)   Use of property in violation of this section shall constitute a
nuisance.
   (c)   In addition to other penalties provided by law, the Director of Law
shall be authorized to institute civil proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin violations of this section; for monetary damages arising
from violations of this section; and to take all actions necessary to secure
enforcement of any injunction and collect upon any award, judgment, or fine in
contempt levied in relation to a violation of this section.
   (d)   Cultivate, manufacture, and dispense have the same meaning as found in
R.C. § 2925.01.
(Ord. 32-2018, passed 1-7-2019)
CHAPTER 1298:  GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Section
   
1298.01   Application of chapter
   
1298.02   Exceptions to building height limits
   
1298.03   Essential services
   
1298.04   Sleeping quarters in nonresidential districts
   
1298.05   Projections into yards; porches and terraces
   
1298.06   Application of Code to construction in progress
   
1298.07   Front yard depth variances in Residential Districts
   
1298.08   Railroad rights-of-way
   
1298.09   Accessways; walks and terraces
Cross-reference:
   Appeals and variances, see §§
1264.06 et seq.
   Fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
   Nonconforming lots, uses and buildings, see
Ch. 1292
   Official Zoning Districts Map, see §
1266.04
   Off-street parking and loading, see
Ch. 1294
   Planned unit developments, see
Ch. 1290
   Supplementary regulations, see
Ch. 1296
   Zoning certificates, see §§
1262.03 et seq.
   Zoning Inspector, see §§
1262.01,
1262.02
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see R.C. §§ 713.06 et seq.
§ 1298.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be subject to the exceptions set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.02  EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITS.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit established for the district in
which the building is located. The following structures, however, may be
erected above such heights: penthouses or roof structures for the housing of
elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to
operate and maintain a building; fire or parapet walls; and skylights, towers,
steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles, chimneys, radio and television
aerials, smokestacks, wireless masts, water tanks and similar structures. No
such structure shall occupy more than 25% of the total roof area of the
building or be used for residential purposes.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.03  ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   (a)   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by
any law of the State of Ohio and the City of Shelby, it being the intent of
this Zoning Code to exempt such essential services from the application of this
Zoning Code.
   (b)   Essential services shall include the erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or government agencies, of
underground gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems or sites, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, traffic
signals, hydrants or other similar equipment which is reasonably necessary for
the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or agencies or for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.04  SLEEPING QUARTERS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Within any B Business District or I Industrial District, the sleeping
quarters of a watchman or caretaker may be permitted, provided that such
quarters are made a part of and are attached as part of the main building or
structure.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.05  PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS; PORCHES AND TERRACES.
   Open, unenclosed porches or paved terraces may project not more than ten
feet beyond the minimum front yard setback line.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.06  APPLICATION OF CODE TO CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building upon which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code and
upon which actual construction has been diligently carried on, provided that
such building shall be completed within one year from the date of passage of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.07  FRONT YARD DEPTH VARIANCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In any R Residential District, where the average depth of at least two
existing front yards on lots located within 100 feet of the lot in question,
and within the same block, is less than the minimum front yard setback
prescribed  for the district in which the lots are located, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may modify the required front yard depth of the lot, provided that it
is not less than the average depth of the two adjoining lots.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.08  RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, railroad rights-of-way shall be
permitted as authorized and regulated by state and federal law. Buildings and
structures intended to be erected or constructed within railroad right-of-way
shall comply with the use, area and height requirements of the district in
which they are located. Spur tracks shall be extended from an existing railroad
right-of-way to adjacent industrial districts only when they are totally within
industrial districts.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
§ 1298.09  ACCESSWAYS; WALKS AND TERRACES.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, any walk, terrace or other pavement
surfacing providing access to rear yards and/or principal buildings or
accessory buildings, and not in excess of ten inches above the finished grade,
shall not be considered to be a structure and shall be permitted in any
required yard.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 3-4-1991)
ZONING APPENDICES
Appendix
   
I.   Application for a Zoning Certificate
   
II.   Application for a Conditional Zoning Certificate
   
III.   Application for a Variance
   
IV.   Application for Amendment to the City Zoning Code
   
V.   Application for a Nonconformity Certificate
   
VI.   Thoroughfare Plan (1990)
APPENDIX I – APPLICATION FOR A ZONING CERTIFICATE
   APPLICATION FOR A ZONING CERTIFICATE
   (File in Duplicate)
   THIS APPLICATION, WHEN PROPERLY APPROVED, SHALL CONSTITUTE
   A ZONING CERTIFICATE.
                     NO.                                                      
           
NAME                                                                           
                                                                   
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                                 
PHONE NUMBER                                                                  
                                                           
LOCATION OF PROPERTY                                                          
                                                     
SIZE OF PROPERTY                                                              
                                                           
RESIDENTIAL
NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS                NUMBER OF STORIES                      
                             
HEIGHT                                                         FLOOR AREA PER
UNIT                                                  
FRONT YARD SETBACK                               REAR YARD SETBACK             
                                     
SIDE YARD SETBACKS                                 AND                        
                                                     
LOT WIDTH                                            
BUSINESS
PROPOSED USE                                                                  
                                                             
FRONT YARD SETBACK                                      REAR YARD SETBACK     
                         
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES (Number)                                             
                                             
NUMBER OF STORIES                                                    HEIGHT    
                                               
INDUSTRIAL
PROPOSED USE                                                                   
                                                             
FRONT YARD SETBACK                                                  REAR YARD
SETBACK                               
SIZE OF PROPERTY                                                
SIDE YARD SETBACK                                                  AND        
                                                   
HEIGHT                                                
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES (Number)                                             
     
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE (Describe)                                          
     
SETBACKS:  FRONT                       REAR                        SIDE        
              SIDE                    
OTHER STRUCTURE (Describe)
SETBACKS:  FRONT                       REAR                        SIDE        
              SIDE                    
ATTACH A SITE PLAN SHOWING: 
BOUNDARIES OF PROPERTY
ABUTTING STREETS AND ROADS
ALL EXISTING STRUCTURES
PROPOSED STRUCTURE
FOR WHICH CERTIFICATE IS SOUGHT
Click_here_to_see_the_above_application_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX II – APPLICATION FOR A CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATE
   CITY OF SHELBY, RICHLAND COUNTY, OHIO
                     APPLICATION NO.                                          
   APPLICATION FOR A CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATE
   (File in Duplicate)
   THIS APPLICATION, WHEN PROPERLY APPROVED, SHALL CONSTITUTE A CONDITIONAL
   ZONING CERTIFICATE.
NAME OF APPLICANT                                                              
                                                       
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                               
PHONE NUMBER                                                                  
                                                           
LOCATION OF LAND FOR WHICH CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE IS SOUGHT
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
ZONING DISTRICT                                                               
                                                           
SECTION OF ORDINANCE INVOLVED                                                  
                                         
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Applicant Signature
ATTACH A SITE PLAN SHOWING:
   BOUNDARIES OF PROPERTY
   ABUTTING STREETS OR ROADS
   EXISTING STRUCTURES
   PROPOSED STRUCTURES
   ACTION OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATE IF GRANTED/DENIED.
CONDITIONS (IF ANY) UPON WHICH CERTIFICATE IS GRANTED:
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     President, City Planning Commission
                     City of Shelby
Click_here_to_see_the_above_application_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX III – APPLICATION FOR A VARIANCE
   CITY OF SHELBY, RICHLAND COUNTY, OHIO
                     APPLICATION NO.                                          
   APPLICATION FOR A VARIANCE
   (File in Duplicate)
   THIS APPLICATION WHEN PROPERLY APPROVED SHALL CONSTITUTE
   A VARIANCE CERTIFICATE.
NAME OF APPLICANT                                                              
                                                       
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                               
PHONE NUMBER                                                                  
                                                           
LOCATION OF LAND FOR WHICH VARIANCE SOUGHT
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
ZONING DISTRICT                                                               
                                                           
NATURE OF VARIANCE REQUESTED                                                  
                                           
SECTION OF ORDINANCE INVOLVED                                                  
                                         
GROUNDS UPON WHICH VARIANCE SHOULD BE GRANTED                                 
                       
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Applicant Signature
ATTACH A SITE PLAN SHOWING:
   BOUNDARIES OF PROPERTY
   ABUTTING STREETS OR ROADS
   EXISTING STRUCTURES
   PROPOSED STRUCTURES
   ACTION OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
   VARIANCE IS GRANTED/DENIED
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Chairperson, Board of Zoning Appeals
                     City of Shelby
Click_here_to_see_the_above_application_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX IV – APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT TO THE CITY ZONING CODE
   CITY OF SHELBY, RICHLAND COUNTY, OHIO
   APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT TO THE
   CITY OF SHELBY ZONING CODE
ALL APPLICATIONS MUST BE SIGNED BY AN OWNER OR LESSEE.
NAME OF APPLICANT                                                              
                                                       
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                               
PHONE NUMBER                                                                  
                                                           
LOCATION OF PROPERTY TO BE REZONED                                             
                                       
                                                                               
                                                                         
CURRENT DISTRICT                                                              
                                                         
PROPOSED DISTRICT                                                              
                                                       
IF THE AMENDMENT SOUGHT INVOLVES A CHANGE IN THE TEXT RATHER THAN THE USE
DISTRICT, ATTACH PROPOSED LANGUAGE AND SPECIFY SECTION TO BE AMENDED.
ATTACH A SITE PLAN SHOWING BOUNDARIES OF PROPERTY, ABUTTING STREETS AND ROADS.
ATTACH A LIST OF THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF ALL PROPERTY OWNERS WITHIN, CONTIGUOUS
TO AND DIRECTLY ACROSS THE STREET FROM THE PROPERTY TO BE REZONED.
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Applicant Signature
Click_here_to_see_the_above_application_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX V – APPLICATION FOR A NONCONFORMITY CERTIFICATE
   CITY OF SHELBY, RICHLAND COUNTY, OHIO
                        APPLICATION NO.                                        
 
   APPLICATION FOR A NONCONFORMITY CERTIFICATE
   (File in Duplicate)
   THIS APPLICATION, WHEN PROPERLY APPROVED, SHALL CONSTITUTE A
   CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATE.
NAME OF APPLICANT                                                              
                                                       
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                               
PHONE NUMBER                                                                  
                                                           
LOCATION OF USE, STRUCTURE OR LOT FOR WHICH NONCONFORMITY CERTIFICATE IS
SOUGHT:
ADDRESS                                                                        
                                                               
LOT NUMBER                                 ZONING DISTRICT                    
                                               
SECTION(S) OF ORDINANCE INVOLVED                                               
                                         
EXPLAIN IN DETAIL THE NONCONFORMITY                                            
                                   
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                         
IF MORE SPACE IS NEEDED ATTACH SEPARATE SHEET.  IF IT WILL HELP IN EXPLANATION,
A SITE PLAN MAY BE INCLUDED.
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Applicant Signature
BASED UPON THIS APPLICATION, A NONCONFORMITY CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED.
                                                                              
                                                                   
Date                     Zoning Inspector
Click_here_to_see_the_above_application_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX VI – THOROUGHFARE PLAN (1990)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f9a289aa6021a8fc647ac61fabe57d10e4962431/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3006.jpg]
 
PART FOURTEEN:  BUILDING AND HOUSING
TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS
      Chapter
         
1420.   OHIO BUILDING CODE
         
1422.   RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE, TWO AND THREE FAMILY DWELLINGS
         
1424.   NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
CHAPTER 1420:  OHIO BUILDING CODE
Section
   
1420.01   1998 edition adopted
   
1420.02   Purpose
   
1420.03   Application
   
1420.04   Compliance; violations
   
1420.05   Enforcement
   
1420.06   File and distribution copies
   
1420.07   Conflicts of laws
 
   
1420.99   Penalty; equitable remedies
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned service stations, see R.C. §§ 3791.11 et seq.
   Application, see R.C. §§ 3781.06, 3781.061, 3781.10(A), 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings, see R.C. § 3781.103
   Enforcement, see R.C. §§ 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction, see R.C. § 3781.04
   Power to enact further and additional regulations, see R.C. § 3781.01
   Removal of unsafe structures, see R.C. §§ 715.26(B), 715.261
   Safety standards for refuse containers, see R.C. § 3791.21
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, see R.C. § 3781.104
   Submission of plans, see R.C. § 3791.04
   Use of public buildings by handicapped persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 1420.01  1998 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
municipality the Ohio Building Code, being particularly the 1998 edition
thereof, or any successor building code enacted after the 1998 edition, as
adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of Industrial
Relations, and as published in the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.), save and
except such portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
§ 1420.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, is to:
   (a)   Provide uniform minimum standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units, such standards relating to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   (b)   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   (c)   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units, which tend to reduce the cost of construction and
erection without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety and
security of the occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and
without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or
methods of construction; and
   (d)   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
§ 1420.03  APPLICATION.
   The Ohio Building Code applies to all buildings as set forth in O.A.C. 4101:
1-1-01.
Cross-reference:
   Energy conservation in one-, two- and three-family dwellings, see R.C. §§
3781.06, 3781.181 and 3781.182
   Incidentally used structures, see R.C. §§ 3781.06 and 3781.061
§ 1420.04  COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip
any building or structure to which the Ohio Building Code is applicable, or
make any addition thereto or alteration thereof, except in the case of repairs
or maintenance that does not affect the construction, sanitation, safety or any
other vital feature of such building or structure, without complying with this
chapter, R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or the Ohio Building Code, or fail to
comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.02)
   (b)   No architect, builder, engineer, plumber, carpenter, mason,
contractor, subcontractor, foreman or employee shall violate or assist in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or
the Ohio Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant
thereto. 
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.03)
   (c)   No owner or any other person shall proceed with the construction,
erection, alteration or equipment of any building or structure to which the
Ohio Building Code is applicable without complying with this chapter and the
plan and specification submission and processing requirements of the
municipality and/or the Ohio Building Code and until plans or drawings,
specifications and data have been approved or the industrialized unit has been
inspected at the point of origin. 
(R.C. § 3791.04)
§ 1420.05  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Ohio Building Code shall be enforced as set forth in O.A.C. 4101:1-1-01.
§ 1420.06  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public. At
least one copy of the Code is also on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies of the Code available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1420.07  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any other order,
standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, the provision of the Ohio Building Code shall control, except that
rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter
3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(R.C. § 3781.11(B))
   (b)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, conflicts with a provision of any other standard technical code
adopted by the municipality, other than as provided in division (a) hereof, or
any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the stricter standard
shall prevail.
   (c)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
Ohio Building Code and is inconsistent with a general provision of the Ohio
Building Code relating to buildings generally, the special provision governs,
unless it appears that the provisions are cumulative.
§ 1420.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any provision of the Ohio Building Code adopted in §
1420.01, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or the
application of any other equitable remedy, including abatement of the nuisance
referred to in §
1420.05(h).
   (c)   The Richland County Division of Building Regulations may institute
injunction proceedings in Common Pleas Court to abate the nuisance of failure
to cease work after receipt of a stop work order as referred to in §
1420.05.
(Ord. 9-82, passed 4-19-1982)
CHAPTER 1422:  RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE, TWO AND THREE FAMILY DWELLINGS
Section
   
1422.01   Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two, and Three Family Dwellings
adopted
Cross-reference:
   Ohio Building Code, see
Ch. 1420
   Permit fee for moving of buildings, see §
1472.01
   Proximity of animals to dwellings, see §
618.18
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes, see R.C. § 731.231
   Power to license house movers, electricians, plumbers and the like, see R.C.
§ 715.27
   Power to regulate building erection, see R.C. §§ 715.26, 715.29, 737.28,
737.37
§ 1422.01  RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE, TWO AND THREE FAMILY DWELLINGS
ADOPTED.
   (a)   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:8, Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two
and Three Family Dwellings, as promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, shall apply and be enforced within the City of Shelby, Ohio.
   (b)   The Richland County Department of Building Regulations is hereby
authorized to exercise the enforcement authority and accept and approve plans
and specifications and make inspections, all in accordance with the Residential
Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family Dwellings.
(Ord. 13-2006, passed 5-15-2006)
CHAPTER 1424:  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
1424.01   1999 edition adopted
   
1424.02   Purpose
   
1424.03   File and distribution copies
   
1424.04   Supplemental city standards
   
1424.05   License required
   
1424.06   Enforcement; right of entry
   
1424.07   Conflicts of laws
 
   
1424.99   Penalty; equitable remedies
Cross-reference:
   Division of Electricity and Communications, see
Ch. 248
   Electric fences, see §
1462.08
   Electric lines in subdivisions, see §
1248.03
   Electricity generally, see
Ch. 1050
   Superintendent of Electric Distribution, see §
246.05
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see R.C. § 731.231
   Power to license electricians, see R.C. § 715.27
§ 1424.01  1999 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city the
National Electrical Code, being particularly the 1999 edition thereof, as
promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, save and except those
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
§ 1424.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, is to establish standards for electrical materials and installations
in dwelling units of one, two and three-family dwellings, mobile homes, multi-
family dwellings and commercial, industrial and institutional occupancy.
§ 1424.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.  At
least one copy of the Code is also on file in the County Law Library.  In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies of the Code available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1424.04  SUPPLEMENTAL CITY STANDARDS.
   The following rules and regulations shall be enforced and shall be complied
with, in addition to the provisions of the National Electrical Code:
   (a)   Service entrance cables. A weatherhead shall be made a part of or
attached to all service entrance cables. In masonry and/or metallic siding, the
service entrance cables shall be installed in rigid galvanized I.M.C. or
Schedule 40 plastic conduit with watertight fittings from service drop to
service equipment.
   (b)   Service entrance conductors.
      (1)   In single-family dwellings of masonry and/or metallic siding, or
where masonry such as face brick or metallic siding has been added, service
entrance conductors shall be installed in rigid galvanized I.M.C. or Schedule
40 plastic conduit with watertight fittings from service drop to service
equipment.
      (2)   Means shall be provided to disconnect all service entrance
conductors and such means shall be installed either inside or outside of the
structure at a readily accessible location nearest the point of entrance of the
service conductor. In no case shall the means of disconnection be located more
than 15 feet inside the structure.
   (c)   Underground service entrance conductors.
      (1)   Underground service entrance conductors shall be located not less
than five feet, lateral measurement, from water, gas and sewer lines.
Variations may be approved, provided that wire is properly protected from
physical damage, i.e., installed in I.M.C. or galvanized rigid conduit.
      (2)   This rule shall apply for both load and line side of a meter.
Underground services must be accurately located on a final drawing, and this
drawing is to be placed on file at the Utilities Office for future reference. A
lateral tolerance of 40 inches will be allowed.
   (d)   Interior wiring. In all newly constructed or rewired buildings in the
fire district, as well as in all newly constructed or rewired commercial and
industrial buildings, whether located in the fire district or elsewhere, all
interior wiring shall be installed in metallic raceways. If the wire is
properly protected from physical damage, the service entrance may be installed
in rigid galvanized I.M.C. or Schedule 40 plastic conduit with watertight
fittings from service drop to service equipment.
   (e)   Inspections.
      (1)   The city has the right to inspect the installation of all
electrical apparatus in accordance with the following schedule:
         A.   Rough in;
         B.   Cover-up inspection (if possible, all circuits should be carried
to the load center or numbered so that outlets can be counted at the time of
first inspection); and
         C.   Final inspection (all fixtures to be in place; joints taped with
rubber and friction tape or approved plastic tape and job complete).
      (2)   For underground service, inspection is to be made by personnel of
the Division of Electricity and Communications prior to covering. Turn-on is
dependent upon approval.
(Ord. 10-84, passed 6-18-1984; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 1424.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person or business consisting of one or more persons shall engage
in the business of installing and/or repairing electrical wiring until that
person or business has registered to do so with the Director of Finance and
Public Record, upon the order of the Mayor. The fee for the registration will
be $50 for the first year and $25 each for a renewal each year afterwards. Each
business need only register once each year, regardless of the number of persons
employed by the business.
   (b)   Application for the registration shall be made on a blank form
prescribed and provided by the Building and Zoning Inspector.
   (c)   No registration shall be issued to any person or business consisting
of one or more persons unless that person, or each person to be employed by
that business to install or repair electrical wiring, holds a valid and
unexpired qualification certificate (electrical contractor), as issued by the
Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board, or has taken and passed an open
book test based upon the latest edition of the National Electrical Code. A
passing grade shall be no less than 75%. Persons who fail to pass the
examination may request retesting on the next available testing date no earlier
than 30 days from the date of the most current test.
(Ord. 14-98, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 40-2005, passed 12-29-2005)
§ 1424.06  ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Inspector shall enforce the National Electrical Code, as
adopted in §
1424.01, and, in the discharge of his or her official duties, shall have
authority, upon proper identification, to enter any dwelling, building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour to enforce and ascertain
compliance with the Code.
§ 1424.07  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, and a provision of state law, or between any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Code and a provision of any other technical code adopted by
the city by reference, the higher or stricter standard shall control.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Code and a provision of any local ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation, the local provision shall control.
§ 1424.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any provision of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in
§
1424.01, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense.  Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or the
application of any other applicable remedy.
TITLE FOUR - BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
1440.   RESERVED
         
1442.   PERMITS AND FEES
CHAPTER 1440:  RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 1442:  PERMITS AND FEES
Section
   
1442.01   Permit required; time limit; approval of plans; inspection;
certificates of occupancy/use; posting of live loads
   
1442.02   Fees
   
1442.03   Permits in newly annexed areas
   
1442.04   Installation of new siding; permit and fee
 
   
1442.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Development permits in flood hazard areas, see §
1466.13
   Excavation permit, see §
1020.01
   Fence permits, see §§
1462.07,
1462.15
   Gasoline service station permit, see Part Eight, Business Regulation and
Taxation
   Permit and fee for construction of communication towers, see §
1460.02
   Permit and fee for moving of buildings, see §§
1472.01 et seq.
   Permits and fees for satellite dish antennas, see §§
1484.02,
1484.03,
1484.05
   Sign permit fees, see §
1480.02
   Subdivision regulation fees, see §
1242.05
   Swimming pool permits and fees, see §§
1482.03 et seq.
   Trailer inspection fee, see §
1492.04
   Zoning fees, see §§
1262.08,
1264.09
§ 1442.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; TIME LIMIT; APPROVAL OF PLANS; INSPECTION;
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY/USE; POSTING OF LIVE LOADS.
   (a)   No person shall build, enlarge, alter or move any building or
structure in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city
and without first submitting a plan of the proposed work, together with a
statement of the materials to be used. A permit must be secured by the owner of
the property before any work is begun. The authority granted by the permit
shall terminate upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy/use, or two years
from the date of issuance, whichever event first occurs.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued for any type of business, apartment
or multi-residence unit building inside the corporate limits of the city, or
any structure of any kind within the fire limits, until building plans and site
plans, including plans for surface water drainage and vehicular parking, have
been submitted to and approved by Council. 
   (c)   Upon completion of construction, or no later than two weeks after the
termination of the building permit, the City Building Inspector shall conduct
an inspection. The Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
use to the property owner if the construction as proposed by the plans has been
completed in accordance with the Ohio Building Code and/or any other rules or
regulations of the state or city applicable to the construction. The Building
Inspector shall examine the entire structure, including but not limited to
framing, siding, roofing, gutters, windows, doors, foundation, backfill and
yard grading. Occupancy or use without this certificate shall be a violation of
this chapter.
   (d)   The live load for which each floor, or part of a floor, of any
business building or storage building is designed and approved, shall be
conspicuously posted in that part of the story or building to which it applies.
(Ord. 32-85, passed 12-16-1985)
§ 1442.02  FEES.
   (a)   New construction.
      (1)   The fee for a permit for new residential or commercial
construction, or for any addition of a valuation of up to $50,000, shall be
$75. This fee includes four inspections. Any additional inspections required
shall be paid for at the rate of $10 each.
      (2)   The fee for a permit for new residential or commercial construction
of a valuation of more than $50,000, but not more than $100,000, shall be $100.
This fee includes four inspections. Any additional inspections required shall
be paid for at the rate of $10 each.
      (3)   The fee for a permit for new residential or commercial construction
of a valuation of more than $100,000, but not more than $200,000, shall be
$150. This fee includes four inspections. Any additional inspections required
shall be paid for at the rate of $10 each.
      (4)   The fee for a permit for new residential or commercial construction
of a valuation of more than $200,000 shall be $200. This fee includes four
inspections.  Any additional inspections required shall be paid for at the rate
of $10 each.
      (5)   The fee for a permit for any addition to a residence that will not
be occupied, such as but not limited to a porch or patio, shall be $20. This
fee includes two inspections. Any additional inspections required shall be paid
for at the rate of $10 each. 
   (b)   Alterations. The fee for a permit for any alteration which is not an
addition shall be $50.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Public structures.  School districts, the city, the county, the state
and the United States shall be exempt from the payment of any fee, but shall
obtain a permit.
   (e)   Garages.  A permit for garages and other outbuildings shall be $20 and
shall include two inspections.
   (f)   Plumbing. 
      (1)   The fee for a plumbing permit shall be $15, plus an additional $2
for each trap and fixture included in the addition or alteration.
      (2)   The plumbing permit fee is separate and apart from any construction
fees charged herein.
   (g)   Fences.  The fee for a permit for the construction of a fence shall be
$10. 
(Ord. 26-99, passed 6-21-1999; Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1442.03  PERMITS IN NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS.
   Building permits for work in an area in the city annexed to the city from a
township, after the passage of a comprehensive zoning plan by the township,
shall not be approved by Council until the permit has been submitted to the
Building Inspector or other duly authorized person or board of the township,
and until his or her or its recommendations have been noted thereon.
(Ord. 7-70, passed 2-16-1970)
§ 1442.04  INSTALLATION OF NEW SIDING; PERMIT AND FEE.
   (a)   The City Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
inspect the improvement of any dwelling or structure by the installation of new
aluminum, vinyl, metallic, asbestos or any other siding.
   (b)   A permit for the installation of any new aluminum, vinyl, metallic,
asbestos or any other siding upon any dwelling or structure shall be required
and the same shall be obtained from the Building Inspector at the cost of $5.
However, if the installation of any of the aforesaid siding is part of new
construction for which a permit has already been obtained, there shall be no
additional charge for the inspection of the siding.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, new vinyl, aluminum, metallic, asbestos
or any other siding shall be any siding which is being newly installed upon a
dwelling or structure and not necessarily new in its origin. 
(Ord. 45-79, passed 9-4-1979)
§ 1442.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or erects, constructs, alters or repairs, or has erected, constructed,
altered or repaired, a building or structure in violation of a detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved under §
1442.01 or of a permit issued under §
1442.01, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
TITLE SIX - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
1460.   COMMUNICATION TOWERS
         
1462.   FENCES
         
1466.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
1468.   CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
         
1470.   DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
         
1472.   MOVING OF BUILDINGS
         
1474.   NUMBERING OF STRUCTURES
         
1476.   PROJECTIONS INTO PUBLIC WAYS AND GROUNDS
         
1480.   SIGNS
         
1482.   SWIMMING POOLS
         
1484.   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
         
1486.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
         1488.   HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 1460:  COMMUNICATION TOWERS
Section
   
1460.01   Definitions
   
1460.02   Construction or installation; permit required; conditions; plans;
notices; exemptions; fees
   
1460.03   Other regulations
 
   
1460.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television, radio, telephone, telegraph or other
mass communication service, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Powers of and restrictions on public utility services, see R.C. § 4931.11
§ 1460.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Communication distribution system." Broadcast antennae for wireless
telephone, AM and FM radio, microwave and television systems.
   (b)   "Communications tower." A structure, 35 feet or higher, that is
intended for commercial transmitting, receiving or relaying of television,
radio, telephone or other communications.
(Ord. 28-96, passed 8-5-1996)
§ 1460.02  CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; PLANS;
NOTICES; EXEMPTIONS; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall construct or install a communication tower over 35
feet above grade in the city without first obtaining a special permit for the
same from the City Planning Commission.
   (b)   The City Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions a special permit for a communication tower over 35 feet in height
based on a site plan to be submitted by the applicant as prescribed by the
Commission.  In making its decision, while upholding the purpose of this
chapter, the Commission shall consider that the proposed tower and attendant
installation be:
      (1)   Sited so that all reasonable alternatives for tower placement have
been clearly and convincingly demonstrated so that the installation will
minimize the visual intrusion of the tower;
      (2)   Shared with users to minimize the proliferation of towers within
the city, including the presentation of evidence demonstrating that
consideration was given to co-locating the communication devices and related
equipment on nearby pre-existing towers and that the co-location was rejected
due to one of the following reasons:
         A.   Adequate space was not available on any nearby tower;
         B.   No nearby tower could be structurally reinforced to accept the
co-location at a reasonable cost;
         C.   Interference with existing signal devices was unacceptable and
could not be shielded at a reasonable cost;
         D.   Good faith negotiations with the owner(s) of existing towers
could not produce a satisfactory agreement; or
         E.   Any other justifiable reason acceptable to the City Planning
Commission.
      (3)   Detailed in a site plan to include complete structure locations and
setbacks; and
      (4)   Located to minimize the visual impact at base elevation of the
proposed structure by a comprehensive landscape plan.
   (c)   Plans submitted for proposed towers shall conform to the following
development standards:
      (1)   Minimum setback from all property lines to the tower and all
accessory buildings shall be a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
"Setback" shall be defined as the distance from the property line to the
nearest portion of the structure(s).
      (2)   Underground wiring to the site shall be required.
      (3)   Equipment, mobile or immobile, not used in direct support of the
transmission or relay facility, shall not be stored or parked on the site
except in connection with a repair or maintenance being made to the
installation.
      (4)   Obsolete or unused facilities shall be removed within 12 months of
ceasing operation.
      (5)   Plans shall provide for a six-foot high obscuring fence around the
structure and located as close to the structure as possible while still
allowing adequate room for maintenance, temporary vehicle parking and the like.
   (d)   Applicants shall notify all adjoining landowners of a proposed
communication tower installation and of any hearings before the City Planning
Commission prior to obtaining a special permit from the City Planning
Commission.
   (e)   The following are exempt from the special provisions of this section:
      (1)   Amateur radio installations operating in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, 47 C.F.R. Part 97.
      (2)   Telephone poles which are part of a communication distribution
system for telephone wires.
   (f)   A nonrefundable fee of $150 shall be paid to the City Planning
Commission for review of each application for a special permit for a
communication tower.  A building and electrical permit must be applied for
prior to erecting a tower.  The fee for the building and electrical permits
shall be in addition to the City Planning Commission fee.
(Ord. 28-96, passed 8-5-1996)
§ 1460.03  OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The foregoing regulations are in addition to any other regulations and/or
ordinances regarding the construction, installation and maintenance of a
communication tower or other structure or building.
(Ord. 28-96, passed 8-5-1996)
§ 1460.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1462:  FENCES
Section
   
1462.01   Definitions
   
1462.02   Unsightly fences
   
1462.03   Fences in yards
   
1462.04   Vegetation along fences
   
1462.05   Proximity of fences to right-of-way
   
1462.06   Maintenance of live fences
   
1462.07   Construction or erection of fences; permit required
   
1462.08   Electric fences
   
1462.09   Barbed wire fences
   
1462.10   Chain link and wire mesh fences
   
1462.11   Fences in rear yards in Residential Districts
   
1462.12   Fences in front and side yards
   
1462.13   Fences in Business, Commercial or Industrial Districts
   
1462.14   Swimming pool fences
   
1462.15   Conformity with permit
 
   
1462.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fences as screening devices, see §
1296.13
   Fences for swimming pools, see §
1482.06
Statutory reference:
   Damaging or removing fences, see R.C. § 3767.201
   Fences, see R.C. Ch. 971
§ 1462.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Fence." A predominantly vertical and continuous structure or device
intended to enclose, confine or delineate an otherwise open area of land.
Hedges, trees, bushes, shrubs and plants or ornamental fences are not included
within the meaning of the word "fence," but are subject to the regulations of §
1462.06.
   (b)   "Ornamental fence." A predominantly vertical and continuous structure
or device intended primarily for ornamentation and not for confining an area
and generally referred to as a "split rail" or "post and rail" fence, or a
fence located not closer to any public right-of-way than three feet and
constructed in a manner so as to conform to the following:
      (1)   The maximum height of the fence, from the ground surface along
which the fence is erected to the top of the highest rail, shall be 36 inches,
and to the top of any post, 42 inches.
      (2)   No rail, which, for purposes of this division, means a horizontal
structure erected as a component part of a fence, shall be constructed nearer
to any other rail than six inches, unless the rails criss-cross.
      (3)   No more than two rails, not to exceed eight inches each in width,
shall be constructed between adjacent posts.
      (4)   No post, which, for purposes of this division, shall be constructed
to be a vertical structure erected as a component part of a fence, shall be
constructed nearer to any other post than four feet.
   (c)   "Side yard portion of a front yard." All land adjacent to a front yard
and extending backward to the front setback of any dwelling.
   (d)   "Side yard portion of a rear yard." All land adjacent to a rear yard
and extending forward to a point at the front setback of any dwelling.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.02  UNSIGHTLY FENCES.
   No person shall construct and/or maintain a fence in a condition so as to
detract from general aesthetics, conditions and/or values.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.03  FENCES IN YARDS.
   No person shall erect or in any way maintain a fence in a front, rear or
side yard, which fence would, in the opinion of the Zoning Inspector, be
contrary or detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity or general welfare.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 12-2011, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 1462.04  VEGETATION ALONG FENCES.
   No person shall plant vegetation or allow it to grow along any fence
permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.05  PROXIMITY OF FENCES TO RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person shall erect or in any way maintain a fence closer than 18 inches
to a public right-of-way, except as set forth in §
1462.01.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.06  MAINTENANCE OF LIVE FENCES.
   Hedges, shrubs and/or other vegetation used to enclose, border or otherwise
delineate front yards, rear yards, side yards or portions thereof, shall be
maintained in the same manner as constructed fences, with respect to
aesthetics, heights and distances from public rights-of-way, and in a manner
not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. No permit is required
for the vegetation.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.07  CONSTRUCTION OR ERECTION OF FENCES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct or erect a fence or ornamental fence without first
obtaining a permit form therefor from the city, which form, when filed, shall
be accompanied by a diagram showing the location, size, style and type of
proposed construction. No fence permit shall be approved without the applicant
furnishing proof that property monuments are in place. Fees for fence permits
shall be as provided in
Chapter 1442. The city is hereby authorized to issue fence permits where the
applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Fences on
corner lots and other lots of unusual shape, or where unusual conditions exist,
as determined by the Zoning Inspector, may be submitted to the Planning
Commission for consideration and approval.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 12-2011, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 1462.08  ELECTRIC FENCES.
   No person shall construct, erect or maintain an electrically charged fence
in the city.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.09  BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   No person shall construct, erect or maintain a barbed wire fence in the
city.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.10  CHAIN LINK AND WIRE MESH FENCES.
   No person shall construct a chain link or wire mesh fence in a Residential
District, as set forth in the Zoning Code, unless the barbs and the unfinished
and sharp edges on the fence are pointing toward the ground. The top edges of
all metal fences constructed, erected or maintained in any Residential District
shall be of a smoothly finished, continuous material.
§ 1462.11  FENCES IN REAR YARDS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In Residential Districts, as set forth in the Zoning Code, a fence not
exceeding six feet in height may be located in any rear yard, provided that the
fence does not project into any required side yard or front yard.
§ 1462.12  FENCES IN FRONT AND SIDE YARDS.
   (a)   In the front yard and/or that part of a side yard that abuts a street,
no person shall erect a fence except an ornamental fence.
   (b)   In side yards and side yard portions of back yards, no person shall
erect a fence with a height greater than 42 inches. In addition, reasonable
pedestrian and/or traffic visibility for the first 15 feet of any driveway and/
or the first 30 feet of any roadway or public thoroughfare shall be provided.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.13  FENCES IN BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   No person shall construct a fence in any Business, Commercial or Industrial
District, as set forth in the Zoning Code, and no building permit shall be
issued therefor until the same has been approved by the Zoning Inspector.
Application for a fence permit shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning
Inspector, accompanied by a drawing showing the location, character and extent
of the fence. The Zoning Inspector shall approve the application if he or she
finds that the fence is consistent with the safety of pedestrians, vehicular
traffic and persons normally coming into the area in proximity to the fence;
will not impair light or the movement of air in a manner tending to cause an
unhealthy condition; will not adversely affect the reasonable use of abutting
properties; and will adequately screen the operations on the property of the
applicant from abutting properties in the event that the same is necessary to
the normal enjoyment of the abutting property. Upon approval of the Zoning
Inspector, a permit to construct a fence of the location, character and extent
approved shall be issued.
(Ord. 12-2011, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 1462.14  SWIMMING POOL FENCES.
   In order to protect the safety of the inhabitants of the city, the Zoning
Inspector may issue permits for the construction of fences for the purpose of
enclosing swimming pools which may be located or of a height other than as
prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 12-2011, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 1462.15  CONFORMITY WITH PERMIT.
   No person shall construct a fence or ornamental fence otherwise than
strictly in accordance with the location, character and extent of the fence
covered by the building permit issued therefor.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
§ 1462.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 7-77, passed 5-16-1977)
CHAPTER 1466:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
1466.01   Statutory authorization; findings of fact
   
1466.02   Statement of purpose
   
1466.03   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
1466.04   Definitions
   
1466.05   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
1466.06   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
1466.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
1466.08   Interpretation
   
1466.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
1466.10   Severability
   
1466.11   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
1466.12   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
1466.13   Floodplain development permits
   
1466.14   Application required
   
1466.15   Fees
   
1466.16   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   
1466.17   Inspections
   
1466.18   Post-construction certifications required
   
1466.19   Revoking a floodplain development permit
   
1466.20   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
1466.21   Map maintenance activities
   
1466.22   Data use and flood map interpretation
   
1466.23   Substantial damage determinations
   
1466.24   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction
   
1466.25   Appeals and variances
   
1466.26   Enforcement
 
   
1466.99   Violations and penalties
Cross-reference:
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Subdivisions in flood plains, see §
1246.04
Statutory reference:
   Conservancy districts; purpose, see R.C. § 6101.04
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors, see R.C. § 1515.08
   Flood insurance, see R.C. §§ 3925.34(C)
   Marking flood areas, see R.C. § 1521.14
   Ohio Water Commission, see R.C. § 1525.12
   Reduction of assessed valuation for establishing reservoirs, see R.C. §
1521.09
   Water supply, sanitation, ditches, see R.C. §§ 6101.01 et seq.
§ 1466.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the Council of
the City of Shelby, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows:
   (a)   The city has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
   (b)   Structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In order to
minimize the threat of such damages, and to achieve the purposes hereinafter
set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (h)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood-prone areas;
   (i)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (j)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (k)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (l)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.03  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiting that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.04  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   (a)   "Accessory structure." A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   (b)   "Appeal." A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   (c)   “Base flood.”  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The “base flood” may also be referred to as the 1%
chance annual flood or 100-year flood.
   (d)   “Base (100-year) flood elevation (BFE).”  The water surface elevation
of the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
and usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL).  In Zone AO areas, the
“base flood elevation” is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number
(from one to three feet).
   (e)   “Basement.”  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   (f)   “Development.”  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   (g)   “Enclosure below the lowest floor.”  See "Lowest floor."
   (h)   “Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management).”  Issued by President
Jimmy Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally-assisted activities
be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
   (i)   “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).”  The agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).
   (j)   “Fill.”  A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   (k)   “Flood” or “flooding.” A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   (l)   “Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM).” Usually the initial map, produced
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community, depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.
   (m)   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).” An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   (n)   “Flood Insurance Risk Zones.” Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs
that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a
community. Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   (o)   “Flood Insurance Study (FIS).”  The official report in which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   (p)   “Flood protection elevation (FPE).”  The base flood elevation. In
areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the
flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood
elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (q)   “Floodway.”  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge.  A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.  The floodway is an extremely hazardous area and is
usually characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high-velocity flood
waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high
erosion forces.
   (r)   “Freeboard.” A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice
jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   (s)   “Historic structure.”  Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (t)   “Host community.” A community that participates in the National Flood
Insurance Program that has structures located within the special flood hazard
area which have sustained damage from a natural disaster or other calamity and
is in need of assistance from a Mutual Aid Floodplain Administrator.
   (u)   “Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis.”  An analysis
performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in
accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to
determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   (v)   “Letter of Map Change (LOMC).  A Letter of Map Change is an official
FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs
are broken down into the following categories:
      (1)   “Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA).” A revision based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood
hazard area.
      (2)   “Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).”  A revision based on technical
data that, usually due to man-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   “Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR).”  A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.
   (w)   “Lowest floor.”  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement) of a structure.  This definition excludes an enclosure
below the lowest floor, which is an unfinished or flood- resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance
with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for
enclosures below the lowest floor.
   (x)   “Manufactured home.” A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle. For the
purposes of these regulations, a “manufactured home” includes manufactured
homes and mobile homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.
   (y)   “Manufactured home park.”  As specified in O.A.C. 3701-27-01, any
tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation,
are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as
part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the
individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the
purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a
“manufactured home park”, even though three or more manufactured homes are
parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government
authority.
   (z)   “Mutual Aid Floodplain Administrator.” The person authorized on behalf
of a host community, pursuant to this chapter, to enforce the flood damage
reduction regulations of the city.
   (aa)   “National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).” A federal program enabling
property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection
against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an
insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   (ab)   “New construction.”  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Shelby Flood
Insurance Rate Map, March 2, 1989, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
   (ac)   “Person.”  Includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and
local governments and agencies. An “agency” is further defined in R.C. § 111.15
as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to,
any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district, technical
college district, or state community college. “Agency” does not include the
General Assembly, the controlling board, the Adjutant General's department, or
any court.
   (ad)   “Recreational vehicle.”  A vehicle which is (1) built on a single
chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
   (ae)   “Registered professional architect.” A person registered to engage in
the practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to
4703.19.
   (af)   “Registered professional engineer.”  A person registered as a
professional engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ag)   “Registered professional surveyor.” A person registered as a
professional surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ah)   “Special flood hazard area.”  Also known as “areas of special flood
hazard”, it is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. “Special flood hazard areas” are designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood
Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. “Special flood hazard areas” may
also refer to areas that are flood-prone and designated from other federal,
state or local sources of data, including but not limited to historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood-prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   (ai)   “Start of construction.”  The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual “start of construction” means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   (aj)   “Structure.”  A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas
or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   (ak)   “Substantial damage.”  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   (al)   “Substantial improvement.” Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (am)   “Variance.” A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   (an)   “Violation.”  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 1466.05  LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city as identified in § 1466.06, including any
additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the city.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.06  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (a)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Richland County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
and Flood Insurance Rate Map Richland County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective April 4, 2011.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways oi delineation of other areas of special flood hazard.
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the city as required by §
1466.24(c) Subdivisions and Large Developments.
   (b)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the City of Shelby Engineering Office, 43 West
Main Sheet, Shelby, OH 44875.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.07  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances,
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction, covenant or easement, but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.08  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.09  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer, agent or
employee thereof, Mutual Floodplain Administrators or their agency, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 1466.10  SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.11  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Engineer or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer
and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.12  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
   (a)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas.
   (b)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
   (c)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
   (d)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
   (e)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations, including Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations.
   (f)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
   (g)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
   (h)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
   (i)   Conduct substantial damage deteminations to determine whether existing
structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
   (j)   Oversee and supervise the Mutual Aid Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 1466.13  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity, including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1466.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.14  APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
   (b)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
   (c)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
   (d)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations.
   (e)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1466.24(e).
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1466.24(d)(3) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1466.24(i)(1).
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1466.24(i)(2).
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1466.24(i)(1).
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large
developments as required by §
1466.24(c).
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.15  FEES.
   (a)   A flood damage prevention permit filing fee of $25 shall be charged
for all proposed developments in the flood hazard area.
   (b)   A plan review and inspection fee of an additional $50 shall be charged
when the Engineer determines that the proposed development must comply with
local floodplain standards.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.16  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a completed application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
1466.14 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required, including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
   (b)   Approval.  Within 30 days after the receipt of a completed
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.17  INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.18  POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (a)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative.
   (b)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
1466.21(a), a Letter of Map Revision.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.19  REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if, among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with §
1466.25 of these regulations.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.20  EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000.
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of O.A.C. Section 3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under R.C. Chapter 4906.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Older 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   (b)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.21  MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA and to ensure that the city's flood maps,
studies and other data identified in §
1466.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
   (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the Floodplain Administrator shall ensure that technical
data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         A.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         B.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         C.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         D.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Section
1466.24(c).
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with §
1466.21(a), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision or letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and
processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         B.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to §
1466.21(a)(1).
   (b)   Right to submit new technical data.  The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor and may be submitted at
any time.
   (c)   Annexation/detachment.  Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area or
no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations
for a particular area. In order that the Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately
represent the city's boundaries, the Floodplain Administrator shall include
within such notification a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction,
clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the city has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.22  DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:
   (a)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (b)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the
preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously existing
flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these
regulations.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (d)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §
1466.25, Appeals and Variances.
   (e)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks, and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.23  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (a)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, and the like. After such a damage
event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (b)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.24  USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §
1466.06 or
1466.22(a):
   (a)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses.  All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the city are allowed,
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701.
         B.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
   (b)   Water and wastewater systems.  The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and large developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage;
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less; and
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
1466.21(a)(1)D. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by §
1466.24(c)(4).
   (d)   Residential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring set forth in
this division (d)(1), and construction materials resistant to flood damage set
forth in division (d)(2) of this section are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantia] improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of this division (d).
   (e)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
1466.24(d)(1) through (3) and (5) through (7).
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
§
1466.24(e)(2)A. and B.
   (f)   Accessory structures.  Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood- resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or flood proofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
1466.24(d)(5)C.
   (g)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles must meet at least one
of the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days; or
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of §
1466.24(d):
   (h)   Above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks.  All above-ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation oi lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (i)   Assurance of flood-carrying capacity.  Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood-
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted, provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1466.24(i)(1)A.;
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor of the City of Shelby and the Chief
Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted, provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible;
            2.   Section
1466.24(i)(1)B.1. and  3. through 5.
   (j)   Alterations of a watercourse.  For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks.  The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the "bankfull stage"
The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be based on methods presented
in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream
Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other
applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other authoritative
source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following
standards apply:
      (1)   The bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood- carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
1466.21(a)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.25  APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Appeals board established.  The Appeals Board as established by City
Council in
Chapter 1264, Board of Zoning Appeals, shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
1466.25(d) of these regulations.
   (c)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official
action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board, provided that such person shall
file, within 15 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official
action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation
of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision.
Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
   (d)   Variances.  Any person believing that the use and development
standards of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an
application for a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these
regulations, not inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or
parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship.
      (1)   Application for a variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (2)   Notice for public hearing.  The Appeals Board shall schedule and
hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions set forth in §
1264.08(b).
      (3)   Public hearing.
         A.   At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and
evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of
these regulations and the following factors:
            1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
            2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
            3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
            4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
            5.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
            6.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
            7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
            8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
            9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
            10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sedimen transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
            11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
         B.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the
property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these
regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense,
nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws.
            4.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
            5.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (e)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in §
1466.25(d)(3)A.1. through 11. have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
   (e)   Procedure at hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal or variance.
      (4)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition
to the appeal or variance.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or its counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for appeal.
      (7)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing, or the decision may be issued in writing within a
reasonable time after the hearing.
   (f)   Appeal to the court.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals
Board may appeal such decision to the Richland County Court of Common Pleas, as
provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.26  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Compliance required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations, and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit
as stated in §
1466.20.
      (2)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
1466.99.
      (3)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1466.99.
   (b)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall
give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor and order
compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and
order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which,
if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 1466.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a minor misdemeanor. Any person who violates these regulations
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof
be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city.  Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall prosecute any
violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 4-2011, passed 3-7-2011)
CHAPTER 1468:  CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
Section
   
1468.01   Definitions
   
1468.02   Contractor registration and requirements
   
1468.03   Term and renewal
   
1468.04   Revocation or suspension of registration
   
1468.05   Assignment, transfer or use by third person
   
1468.06   Exemptions
   
1468.07   Right to appeal
 
   
1468.99   Penalty
§ 1468.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   “Contractor” means any person, firm or corporation which builds,
constructs, repairs, replaces, remodels, alters or otherwise improves any land
or building, or any portion thereof, as a business for profit in the city.
“Contractor” includes, without limitation, the following crafts, trades and
businesses:
   General Contractor
   Roofing Contractor
   Electrical Contractor (Commercial)
   Electrical (Class B)
   Demolition Contractor
   Sign Erector
   HVAC Contractor
   Framing Carpenter
   Fire Protection Contractor
   Drywall Contractor
   Landscaping Including Arborist and Tree Trimmer
   Pool Installer
   Hydronics Contractor
   Excavating Contractor
   Plaster Contractor
   Steel Erectors
   Waterproofing Contractor
   Replacement Window Contractor
   Insulation Contractor
   Fencing Contractor
   Electrical Residential (Class A)
   Electrical Journeyman
   Sewer Tapper
   Paving Contractor
   Concrete Contractor
   Finish Carpenter
   Painting Contractor
   Siding Contractor
   Flooring
   Refrigeration Contractor
   Tree/Stump Removal
   Plumber
   Cabinet Contractor
   Foundation Contractor
   Closet Shelving and Mirror and Fireplace Contractor
   (b)   “General contractor” means any person, firm or corporation, fitting
the definition of contractor herein, who coordinates other contractors working
on the same project.
   (c)   “Subcontractor” means any person, firm or corporation, fitting the
definition of contractor herein, who performs a special skill, trade, craft or
profession as a part of a construction contract on behalf of a general
contractor.
   (d)   “Immediate family” means an owner's spouse, child, parent, stepparent,
grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, parent-in-law, brother-in- law,
sister-fn- law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle or first cousin.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1468.02  CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Any contractor, general contractor or subcontractor engaged in
contracting, construction, alteration, repair, replacement or removal or
demolition of buildings or structures, as business for profit in the city
shall, before performing any work within the corporation limits of Shelby,
register with the Mayor as Director of Public Service as set forth herein.
   (b)   Requirements. A contractor, general contractor, or subcontractor
seeking to be registered shall submit the following to the Mayor as Director of
Public Service:
      (1)   A certificate of liability insurance in the amount not less than
$100,000 per person or $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, and $50,000
per accident for property damage (except automobile), for any and all losses to
persons by reason of any negligence on the part of himself or his agents or
employees while engaged in the performance of construction work in the city.
Failure on the part of the contractor to maintain this insurance coverage on a
continuous basis will result in automatic cancellation of the registration/
license. Provision will be made by the contractor to have his insurance company
give the city at least 15 days prior written notice in the event of
cancellation or non-renewal of this insurance coverage;
      (2)   Proof of compliance with the State of Ohio's Workers Compensation
Laws;
      (3)   Certificate of registration with the City of Shelby's Income Tax
Division;
      (4)   A current copy of his or her license issued pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4740 by the OCIEB (Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board) to the
contractor or an employee of said contractor, if such a license is required for
the contractor's trade or certificate issued pursuant to R.C. § 3737.65 by the
Ohio Fire Marshal; and
      (5)   A registration fee of $50 for the initial registration and $25 for
any renewal.
      Upon submission of the items required above, the Mayor as Director of
Public Service shall issue a registration certificate. The Mayor as Director of
Public Service may deny the application if the contractor fails to submit any
of the items required above.
   (c)   No person, firm or corporation shall knowingly allow a contractor,
general contractor or subcontractor who has failed to register with the Mayor
as Director of Public Service to perform any work in the city.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 20-2015, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1468.03  TERM AND RENEWAL.
   A registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid
until December 31 and shall be renewed annually thereafter. A registration
certificate may be renewed within 30 days following the expiration date,
however, a 10% penalty will apply.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1468.04  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Any registration or permit may be revoked by the Mayor as Director of
Public Service at any time for conditions or considerations which, had they
existed at the time of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial;
for the violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance,
code or regulation within the jurisdiction of the Mayor as Director of Public
Service relating to the matter for which the license or permit was issued or
upon conviction of the holder of any federal, state or city law or ordinance,
involving moral turpitude. Such revocation shall become effective upon notice
served upon the holder or upon notice being posted upon the premises relating
to the license or permit.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Mayor as Director of Public
Service may issue an order suspending a registration or permit, which
suspension shall become effective immediately upon service of written notice
thereof upon the holder. Such notice shall specify the reason for the
suspension and may provide conditions under which reinstatement of the license
or permit may be obtained. Upon compliance with such conditions within the time
specified, the registration or permit shall be restored.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1468.05  ASSIGNMENT, TRANSFER OR USE BY THIRD PERSON.
   A registered contractor shall not assign, transfer or allow any other person
to use his or her or its registration certificate for any purpose. Such act
shall result in suspension of registration. The fee for reinstatement of such
registration shall be double the initial registration fee.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1468.06  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the registration requirements of §
1468.02:
   (a)   Homeowners. No provision of registration shall be interpreted to
require that the owner of a one- family dwelling or a member of his or her
immediate family who does work on said dwelling shall be registered to perform
work upon the premises occupied, or to be occupied, by the owner thereof as
such owner's established residence.
   (b)   Government agencies, private industry maintenance and public
utilities. Provision of registration shall not apply to federal, state, county
or municipal governmental agencies, to public utilities furnishing services to
the city under municipal utilities franchise agreement, or to industrial,
commercial or institutional organizations or firms wherein a maintenance
department, doing work within the provisions of the Building Codes, is
provided, except that should work covered by the Building Code be contracted
with outside contractors, then such contractors shall be registered in the city
as provided herein.
   (c)   Owners of rental properties.  No provision of registration shall be
interpreted to require that the owner of a residential rental property be
registered as a contractor in order to perform work on property owned by him or
her.
   (d)   Members of certain recognized religious orders.  In lieu of compliance
with §§
1468.02(b)(1) and
1468.02(b)(2), a member of a recognized religious order that does not believe
in the need to have medical, bodily injury, property damage, or any type of
liability may sign a waiver and release of liability form by which the signer
assumes all risks and liabilities that may occur during construction, within
the City of Shelby, of any project by him or her or his or her company
including, but not limited to, death, bodily injury, damage to surrounding and
neighboring properties, theft, and/or loss; furthermore, said signer waives,
releases, and discharges from any and all liability, including but not limited
to the City of Shelby, 43 West Main Street, Shelby, OH 44875 and/or its
directors, officers, employees, representatives, and agents from liability
arising from the negligence or fault of the entities or persons released, for
my death, disability, personal injury, property damage, property theft, or
actions of any kind which may hereafter occur to me or my employees;
furthermore, said signer shall indemnify, hold harmless, and promise not to sue
the entities or persons mentioned in the aforementioned paragraph from any and
all liabilities or claims made as a result, whether caused by the negligence,
accidental or otherwise, during construction of this project.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 20-2015, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1468.07  RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, any applicant for a registration
certificate hereunder which has had such certificate denied, or which has had
such certificate suspended or revoked under the provisions of this chapter,
shall have the right to appeal such denial, suspension or revocation. Such
appeal shall be filed with the Mayor as Director of Public Service within three
business days of such denial, suspension or revocation, or notice thereof, and
shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 for processing the appeal, which fee shall
be refunded if the Mayor as Director of Public Service's decision is wholly
reversed. The Mayor as Director of Public Service shall transmit the file
relating to the matter to the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be represented
at the hearing of the appeal by the Mayor or his or her designee, or as may be
otherwise provided by law. The Mayor as Director of Public Service shall serve
written notice, by registered or certified mail, upon the appellant of the
time, place and date of the hearing on the appeal, and the same shall be set
for the meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals, providing that such date
permits two days' notice thereof to the appellant, and providing further that
the appellant may waive written notice in order to expedite the hearing of the
appeal. The appellant may appear and be heard in person, or by counsel. Failure
to appear at the hearing shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the appeal,
unless prior thereto, the appellant has, through the Board of Zoning Appeals,
requested a continuance.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1468.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 10-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
CHAPTER 1470:  DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
Section
   
1470.01   Definitions
   
1470.02   Demolition contractor to be registered
   
1470.03   Registration and permit required
   
1470.04   Bond
   
1470.05   Insurance; additional bonds
   
1470.06   Demolition permit
   
1470.07   Notice and prosecution of work
   
1470.08   Regulation of demolition and general contractors
   
1470.09   Completion
   
1470.10   Zoning Code reconciliation
   
1470.11   Noncompletion
   
1470.12   Permit compliance
   
1470.13   Exceptions
   
1470.14   Violations
 
   
1470.99   Penalty
§ 1470.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Demolish” or “demolition” means the tearing down and removal, so as
to require reassembly as new construction if rebuilt, of any dangerous
building, shed, fence or other man-made structure permanently affixed to the
soil whose original construction cost was $500 or more.
   (b)   “Party wall” means a wall, part of a building or fence constructed
upon and straddling the common lot line between two adjoining properties under
different ownership and serve both of such adjoining properties.
   (c)   “Permanently affixed to the soil” means construction or erection so
designed as to not anticipate removal from the original site during the
reasonable life of the building or structure.
   (d)   “Person” includes individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.02  DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR TO BE REGISTERED.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of demolishing any structure,
unless he or she has registered the business in the city. The registration
shall not be approved until the applicant has paid a registration fee of $50
for the first year or $25 for a renewal each year after, and has filed with the
Director of Public Safety evidence of the following:
      (1)   Compensation insurance.  The applicant shall procure and shall
maintain during the life of his or her registration workers' compensation
insurance as required by applicable state or territorial law for all of his or
her employees to be engaged in the business of demolishing structures in the
city. In case any class of employees engaged in hazardous work is not protected
under the workers' compensation statute, the applicant shall provide adequate
employer's liability insurance for the protection of such of his or her
employees as are not otherwise protected.
      (2)   Contractor's public liability and property damage insurance and
vehicle liability insurance. The applicant shall procure and shall maintain
during the life of his or her registration contractor's public liability
insurance, contractor's property damage insurance and vehicular liability
insurance in the following amounts: public liability insurance in an amount not
less than $250,000 for injuries, including accidental death to any one person,
and subject to the same limit for each person, in an amount not less than
$500,000 on account of one accident, and contractor's property damage insurance
in an amount not less than $500,000.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety shall keep up- to-date files of
registered demolition contractors, with the addresses of their places of
business. Should a registered demolition contractor change the location of his
or her place of business, he or she shall file notice of the change with the
Director of Public Safety and the latter shall cause the record to be amended
accordingly. Notice of city instructions or orders shall be communicated to a
demolition contractor by written notice to be mailed to him or her by certified
mail at the address on file.
   (c)   If any registered demolition contractor violates the provisions of any
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the making of the demolition of
buildings, or fails or refuses to perform any of the duties imposed on him or
her by ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the Mayor as Director of
Public Safety, shall be authorized to revoke his or her registration, and the
demolition contractor shall receive the notice by certified mail.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.03  REGISTRATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, except a general contractor registered in accordance with the
requirements of this
Chapter 1470, nor any employee of such person, shall demolish or undertake to
demolish or represent himself as having the capacity of demolishing any
building or other structure or part thereof, unless he or she has been
registered as a demolition contractor, and no person shall demolish or
undertake to demolish any building or other structure or part thereof, unless
he or she has secured, or caused to be secured, a permit for such demolition
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.04  BOND.
   At the time of making application for a demolition permit as required by §§
1470.03 and
1470.06(a), a demolition contractor applicant shall have on file with the Mayor
as Director of Public Safety a bond in the penal sum $2,000, approved as to
form by the Director of Law, indemnifying the city for all liability arising by
reason of the demolition contractor or his employees while in the pursuit of
his business under a demolition permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.05  INSURANCE; ADDITIONAL BONDS.
   (a)   Prior to engaging in any demolition operations, a demolition
contractor shall have on file with the Mayor as Director of Public Safety
evidence that he has current comprehensive liability insurance as prescribed in
§
1470.02(a).
   (b)   In case of a demolition contract awarded by the city under the
provisions of this chapter, the contractor shall also post satisfactory and
sufficient performance, work, labor and materials bonds, and, if required by
the nature of the work under the contract, sufficient explosive insurance
coverage. As a condition of the issuance of any permit for a specific
demolition project the city may require a performance bond indemnifying the
city for defects in performance within one year after completion of the work
covered by the permit.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.06  DEMOLITION PERMIT.
   (a)   Application.  Application by any person for a demolition permit shall
be in the form prescribed by, and filed with, the Mayor as Director of Public
Safety. Such application shall describe the demolition to be accomplished and
shall designate the manner, method and equipment to be used. Application shall
be made by the owner or the contractor employed to conduct such demolition, or
the agent of either; unless made by the owner, the applicant shall evidence his
or her authority to make application by means of a duly verified affidavit of
the owner. The application shall indicate the date upon which demolition is
intended to begin and the probable date of completion thereof.
   (b)   Issuance of permit.  Prior to issuance of the permit the Mayor and/or
his or her designee shall determine that the proposed method of demolition is
in accordance with good engineering practices and that the contractor or owner
has the necessary and proper means and equipment to accomplish the demolition
in accordance with the manner, method and equipment specified in the
application.
   (c)   Fees.
      (1)   The fees for a demolition permit shall be at the rate of $10 for
residential and $50 for commercial per structure for a four-week period. 
Beyond the four-week period there shall be an additional charge of $10 for each
week until the final inspection certificate can be issued as required by §
1470.09.
      (2)   No fee shall be required for the demolition or removal of any
garage or outbuilding.
      (3)   Abandonment of water and sanitary sewer service shall be approved
by the City of Shelby.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 42-2011, passed 1-2-2012)
§ 1470.07  NOTICE AND PROSECUTION OF WORK.
   The contractor or owner shall give the Mayor as Director of Public Safety 24
hours notice before commencing demolition work under any permit. He shall carry
out the work in an orderly manner and without unnecessary delay. He shall not,
during regular working hours, interrupt his demolition operations without the
consent of the Mayor and/or his or her designee when the permit relates to
demolition within the Central Business District as defined by the Zoning Code
of the city. Provided that the Police Department may require a cessation of
such demolition work for one “rush” hour each morning and each afternoon when
such work requires use of public rights-of-way and continuation thereof would
be especially hazardous to traffic.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.08  REGULATION OF DEMOLITION AND GENERAL CONTRACTORS.
   In undertaking any work of demolition as defined in this chapter any general
or demolition contractor during his entire employment under a contract, whether
public or private, shall be responsible and liable for:
   (a)   Faithful compliance and adherence to all federal, state and local laws
and regulations relating to safe demolition and construction processes and
procedures including equipment, apparel and individual protective devise
regulations.
   (b)   Securing all necessary licenses, permits, easements and rights-of-way.
   (c)   One week notice to the city and utility companies for appropriate
disconnections and the safeguarding thereof.
   (d)   One week notice to adjoining property owners.
   (e)   The protection and safeguarding of adjacent property and public
passersby.
   (f)   Damages resulting from the extension of explosion waves into adjacent
property.
   (g)   Minimization of air pollution and contamination through wetting,
soaking and other dust and debris settling techniques.
   (h)   Installation, erection and maintenance of barricades, warning lights
and signals, pedestrian cautions and walkways in accordance with safety codes,
regulations and ordinances. When necessary for the public protection, the
contractor shall employ guards and watchmen.
   (i)   Unless the contract or orders of the city provide otherwise, total
removal of the structure to the actual building and property line.
   (j)   Provision of proper drainage in the subsoil conditions. Percolation
shall be provided in basement slabs by breaking or by drilling holes through
the slabs, approximately six feet on center in all directions and connecting
drain tile into existing storms where necessary for proper drainage. All floor
slabs, under which a pit well, cistern, tank or void exists, shall be broken or
removed. All drains not removed shall be sealed with masonry or with precast
clay or concrete stoppers.
   (k)   Complete removal from the demolition site of all organic materials,
including wood, plastics, old plaster, floor tile and similar rubble. Masonry,
stone, concrete, tile, bank-run gravel and compacted earth are permitted fill
materials.
   (l)   Adjoining and party walls, as follows:
      (1)   If one of two back-to-back or adjoining walls, each of which is
built along a common property line of two different ownerships, is required by
order to be demolished with the rest of the structure; the contractor shall be
responsible for the adjacent or adjoining property wall for repair of defects
occasioned by the contractor, to the extent that the same shall be repaired or
reconditioned as needed with suitable construction materials and procedures to
ensure that such remaining wall is as free from defects, and safety, fire and
health hazards as it would have been had the wall not been demolished.
      (2)   Where the back-to-back or adjoining wall of the structure to be
demolished is not required to be demolished, the contractor shall ensure that
such wall does not create or constitute a health, fire or safety hazard. When
such wall exposes a variety of materials such as brick, stone, plaster or
block, a cement or latex paint specifically prepared for masonry walls shall be
applied to such exposed surface; provided that other means may be utilized when
prior approval of the means has been granted by the Mayor or his or her
designee.
      (3)   The contractor shall ensure that party walls are structurally sound
and do not create or constitute a health, fire or safety hazard. When such
party wall exposes a variety of materials such as brick, stone, plaster or
block, a cement or latex paint specifically prepared for masonry walls shall be
applied to such exposed surface; provided that other means may be utilized when
prior approval of the means has been granted by the Bureau.
   (m)   Ensuring that any remaining walls, whether adjoining, party or back-
to-back, have all openings, crevices, gaps, fissures, joist slots and the like
plugged and carefully tamped or sealed with some suitable material against the
weather, elements, fowl, rodents and other wildlife, so as to render them free
of health, safety and fire hazards.
   (n)   Maintaining established property lines and grades at the original
lines and grades. Backfill when necessary shall include structures suitable to
retain the original grades. Where vertical walls have been removed from stone
retaining walls, such retaining walls may be retained if suitable backfill is
provided to furnish sufficient side load to retain the original support of the
property. The premises shall be graded to prevent water from unnecessarily
draining onto adjacent premises.
   (o)   Construction of damaged or destroyed curbs, gutters and sidewalks with
new four-inch concrete improvements in accordance with city specifications.
   (p)   Filing with the City Engineer a sketch plan of any foundations, walls
or other pertinent data relating to the site which have been buried by
backfill.
   (q)   Continuity of service to adjacent property by the replacement or
repair of overhangs, cornices, downspouts, and the like, which overhang from
adjacent property and which have been removed or damaged by the contractor.
   (r)   The replacement and repair of damaged or destroyed curb boxes and
utility entrance service.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.09  COMPLETION.
   Demolition of any building or structure under any permit shall not be
considered completed until:
   (a)   The contractor or resident-owner under §
1470.13 has removed all lumber, rubble and other building or structural
materials and debris and all demolition equipment from the graded premises, or,
at the owner's request, has piled it neatly upon the premises, in such a manner
as not to constitute a public nuisance, hazard or possible rodent harborage;
   (b)   The contractor or resident-owner under §
1470.13 has broken and removed all foundations or slabs to not less than two
feet below the ground surface, and has filled all basements, trenches or other
depressions with not less than two feet of compacted earth, or as otherwise
provided herein, graded neatly to the existing established grade level, unless
a building permit has been issued for a structure which will make use of the
foundation or slab remaining after demolition; and
   (c)   The Mayor as Director of Public Safety has issued to the contractor or
resident-owner under §
1470.13 a certificate of final inspection, which certificate shall issue when
the provisions of this chapter have been satisfied, subject, however, to §
1470.05.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.10  ZONING CODE RECONCILIATION.
   (a)   The provisions of §
1470.09(a) shall not be construed so as to permit a violation of the Zoning
Code or other ordinances of the city.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of the Zoning Code or any other
ordinance of the city as pertains to the valid period of a building permit, any
building permit secured which will make use of the foundation or slab referred
to in §
1470.09(b) shall require the beginning of construction within 30 days of its
issuance.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.11  NONCOMPLETION.
   No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of §
1470.09(a) and (b) within three days after a structure or building has been
demolished.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.12  PERMIT COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall demolish a building or structure other than in accordance
with the method of demolition set forth in an approved application for
demolition permit.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.13  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter which require the holding of a demolition
contractor's registration, the filing of bonds and evidence of liability
insurance coverage shall not be applicable to the owner of any parcel of land
desiring to demolish any building or structure which is situated upon the
parcel of land being occupied as the residence of such owner, and when such is
to be executed personally by such owner; and the permit fees established in §
1470.06(c) shall be reduced 50% for such resident-owner applicant.
   Such resident owner shall otherwise comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter as though he were a duly registered general or demolition
contractor.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.14  VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person or firm shall violate any section of this chapter, or any
order made in pursuance thereof, or obstruct or interfere with the execution
thereof, or willfully or illegally omit or fail to obey such order.
   (b)   No officer of a corporation who has authority over the matter involved
in the violation of division (a) hereof shall permit the violation of such
division.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 1470.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Each day of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as a separate offense.
   (b)   In addition to any other penalties provided for violations of the
provisions of this chapter the Mayor as Director of Public Safety shall have
the right to revoke any contractor's registration or any registration or permit
issued under this chapter.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 9-2010, passed 6-21-2010)
CHAPTER 1472:  MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
1472.01   Permit required; fee
   
1472.02   Permit approval; police escort and conditions
   
1472.03   Insurance required for traversing public ground
   
1472.04   Permit limitations
   
1472.05   Basement; sewers and utilities
   
1472.06   Bond for expense to city
   
1472.07   Moving of power lines
 
   
1472.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Commercial and heavy vehicles, see Chs.
440,
442
   Obstruction of public ways, see §
412.01
Statutory reference:
   Power to license building movers, see R.C. § 715.27
§ 1472.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   When any person desires to move any structure or building across any
sidewalk, street, highway or public place within the city limits, he or she
shall apply to the office of the Mayor for a permit for that purpose, and,
before the same is issued, shall pay a fee of $50.  There shall be no fee for
moving a structure from one location to another when no public ground is
traversed.  The responsibility for complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall rest primarily with the owner of the real property to where the
structure or building is being moved.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.02  PERMIT APPROVAL; POLICE ESCORT AND CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Before any permit for moving any structure or building is issued, it
shall be approved by the Mayor.  The applicant shall provide plot plans with
sufficient detail showing both the existing and the proposed sites of the
structure.  The moving of a structure or building is defined as new
construction; therefore, the applicant shall comply with §
1442.02.
   (b)   Whenever it is deemed necessary in the public interest, the Mayor may
require that the moving operations be conducted under the supervision of off-
duty police officers as shall reasonably be required to safeguard life and
property during the course of moving operations.  The charge therefor shall be
negotiated between the officers and the mover and be paid by the mover.  The
Mayor may prescribe, in writing, reasonable conditions, requirements, routes
and precautions, and the days and hours of the day during which the moving
operations shall be conducted, as deemed necessary in the public interest.  All
moving operations shall be performed in conformity therewith.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.03  INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR TRAVERSING PUBLIC GROUND.
   Before any permit for moving any structure or building across any sidewalk,
street, highway or public place within the city limits shall be issued, the
applicant or his or her agent shall furnish an insurance policy, in an amount
of $250,000 for injury or death to one person, $500,000 for injury or death to
more than one person and $250,000 for property damage.  The insurance policy
shall provide that the city be named as insured, and, further, that the
applicant and his or her insurer shall hold the city harmless against any
liabilities, judgments, damages, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue
or arise against the city in consequence of the granting of such a permit or
the performance of any work pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.04  PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   The following limitations shall apply to the use of a building moving
permit:
   (a)   The granting of a permit does not guarantee that the load described
can be moved without damage to the pavement or structures, although the permit
is granted on the assumption that the load can be moved without damage, based
on the best information available.  The permittee shall be held liable for any
and all damage caused by the movement.  The city assumes no responsibility for
damage to the permittee's equipment or load being moved due to any such
failure.  The permittee agrees to hold the city harmless from all claims,
damages or proceedings of any kind, and from all responsibility for personal or
property damage (public or private) caused directly or indirectly as a result
of the transportation of the vehicles or objects.
   (b)   The permit shall be in the possession of the driver at all times
during the progress of transportation, and will be shown on demand to any
police officer or city official.
   (c)   The permission granted shall restrict the movement of the vehicles or
objects to the streets specified, between the points designated and within the
time allotted.
   (d)   No vehicle or building shall be left parked on the roadway, either day
or night, except in case of an emergency, in which case adequate protection
shall be provided for the traveling public at the expense of the permittee.
   (e)   The operator of the vehicle must comply with all laws, rules and
regulations covering the movement of traffic over streets and with reductions
of legal weight posted on roadways or bridges.
   (f)   A permit is void at any time when road, weather or traffic conditions
make travel unsafe.
   (g)   A permit will not be issued for built-up loads that are divisible into
legal loads.
   (h)   Oversize or overweight loads shall be operated or moved at such speeds
and in such a manner as to cause a minimum of interference with other traffic
and minimum impact stresses on structures and pavements.
   (i)   Loads having extremely large dimensions shall require additional
protective measures when necessary for the safeguarding of other traffic.  Due
regard shall be taken of traffic in both directions, and every possible effort
shall be made to prevent traffic congestion.  Red flags, one or more flaggers
or a pilot car may be required.
   (j)   Noncompliance with the general or special provisions of a permit,
exceeding the weights or dimensions granted, or operating on dates or upon
streets other than as assigned, shall render the permit null and void and the
operator of the vehicle subject to arrest.
   (k)   Within 30 days after issuance of the permit, the structure or building
must be moved or the permit will be void, unless an extension of time is
granted by the Mayor because of an act of God or an event fully beyond the
control of the permittee.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.05  BASEMENT; SEWERS AND UTILITIES.
   (a)   Within 72 hours after any part of the structure or building has been
removed from its foundation, the basement area shall be filled and the surface
graded and cleared of all building material and debris.
   (b)   Also, within the 72-hour period, all utilities and sewers are to be
shut off and/or plugged.  The utilities and sewers shall be plugged either at
the inspection test tee, the curb line or the building foundation line, at the
discretion of the Superintendent of Water or the Superintendent of Streets and
Sewers.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.06  BOND FOR EXPENSE TO CITY.
   Before a permit to move a structure or building is issued, a cash bond of
$10,000 shall be deposited with the city to cover any minor damage to city or
private property or additional fees incurred during the move.  If the damage or
fees exceed $10,000, the permittee shall be fully liable for the same.  This
cash bond is to be deposited with the Director of Finance and Public Record. 
Any unused portion of the cash bond shall be released when the permittee has
complied with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987)
§ 1472.07  MOVING OF POWER LINES.
   At least 30 days prior to the moving of any structure or building, where the
moving shall be parallel to or underneath the city's electric distribution
system, the person who desires to move the structure or building, or his or her
agent, shall contact the Superintendent of Electric Distribution in writing and
inform him or her of the proposed route.  The Superintendent shall prepare an
estimate of the cost, if any, to the Division of Electricity and Communications
for removing and replacing its poles, wires, guys and any other equipment of
the electric distribution system.  Copies of the estimate shall be forwarded to
the applicant and the Mayor.  The Mayor shall issue no permit to move any
structure or building until the applicant has paid in full to the city the
amount of the estimate.  In the event the actual costs to the city are less
than the estimate, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.  If the
actual costs are more than the estimate, the applicant shall be fully liable
for the same.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 8-3-1987; Ord. 4-2000, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 1472.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1474:  NUMBERING OF STRUCTURES
Section
   
1474.01   Assignment of numbers; size and material specifications
   
1474.02   Location of numbers
   
1474.03   Space allotted to each number
   
1474.04   Numbering scheme
   
1474.05   New allotments
   
1474.06   Time limit
   
1474.07   Noncompliance; remedy of city
   
1474.08   Defacing numbers
 
   
1474.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Power to assign house numbers, see Charter §
98
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate building numbering, see R.C. § 715.26
§ 1474.01  ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; SIZE AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   All houses and buildings on all streets, lanes, alleys and avenues, or
fronting on any public grounds of the city, shall be numbered according to the
provisions of this chapter. The numbers shall be assigned thereto by the
Building and Zoning Inspector upon a certificate issued upon request of any
owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any premises. The numbers should be of
aluminum, zinc, brass or enamelware, not less than two by three inches in size,
or enamel plates not less than three by six inches in size. However, any person
may number his or her own house or building with such materials and in any
ornamental manner as he or she sees fit, subject to the limitations provided in
§
1474.02.
(1923 Code, § 137)  (Ord. 14-2002, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 1474.02  LOCATION OF NUMBERS.
   The figures of every number placed on any house, building or other structure
shall be distinct and legible and placed in a conspicuous place immediately
above the main entrance of the house, building or other structure and in full
view of the street or other public way or ground.
(1923 Code, § 138)
§ 1474.03  SPACE ALLOTTED TO EACH NUMBER.
   On Main Street, between the first alley east of Broadway and Church Street,
and on Gamble, Broadway, Mohican and Water Streets, for a distance of 200 feet
north and south of Main Street, there shall be a separate number for each 20
feet. In all other parts of the city each lot of 60 feet or less shall bear a
separate number and all larger lots shall bear a separate number for each 60
feet or part thereof.
(1923 Code, § 139)
§ 1474.04  NUMBERING SCHEME.
   All streets running in an eastward and westward direction shall be numbered
eastwardly and westwardly beginning at the Blackfork of the Mohican as a
division line, with the odd numbers on the north and the even numbers on the
south side of the streets. All streets running northward and southward shall be
numbered northwardly and southwardly beginning at Main Street as a division
line, with the even numbers on the west and the odd numbers on the east side of
the streets. The first house number on each street shall be number ten. 
(1923 Code, § 140)
§ 1474.05  NEW ALLOTMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of Council, from time to time as new allotments are
formed and new buildings erected, to apply without delay the provisions of this
chapter insofar as it is charged with the duty of executing the same. 
(1923 Code, § 141)
§ 1474.06  TIME LIMIT.
   The owner, occupant, lessee or agent of any owner of any house, building or
other structure shall cause the house, building or other structure to be
numbered as provided in this chapter within 120 days.
(1923 Code, § 142)
§ 1474.07  NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY.
   The Chief of Police and each police officer of the city shall, and any other
person may, report to the Director of Finance and Public Record, without delay,
all cases coming respectively to their knowledge, of failure to number houses
and buildings. Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, lessee or agent to
affix the proper number thereto within 120 days, the same may be done
immediately by the Director at the expense of the city, and the cost of the
numbering shall be paid for by the owner or lessee of the house or building on
which the same has been placed, and if not paid for on demand, may be charged
as an additional tax upon the property and be collected with such other taxes
as may be chargeable thereon. 
(1923 Code, § 143)
§ 1474.08  DEFACING NUMBERS.
   No person shall interfere with, take down, alter or deface any number on any
house, building or other structure, or put up or retain any number in an
improper manner or substitute any other number on his or her house, building or
other structure than the number specified and defined for the house, building
or other structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1923 Code, § 144)
§ 1474.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(1986 Code, § 1357.99)
CHAPTER 1476:  PROJECTIONS INTO PUBLIC WAYS AND GROUNDS
Section
   
1476.01   Projections prohibited
   
1476.02   Temporary obstructions; permit required
   
1476.03   Removal of obstructions over sidewalks
 
   
1476.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Calculation of open space requirements, see §
1296.09
   Obstruction of public ways, see §
412.01
   Obstruction of sidewalks, see §
660.10
   Open space generally, see
Ch. 1250
   Projections into yards, porches and terraces, see §
1298.05
   Public grounds, see Charter §
102
   Public sites and open spaces in subdivisions, see §§
1246.04,
1248.04
   Signs, see
Ch. 1480
§ 1476.01  PROJECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
1480.02, no person shall erect or cause to be erected, or permit to remain
standing, any house, building, wall, fence or other permanent structure, in
such manner that any part thereof stands or projects over or beyond the line of
any lot or parcel of land into any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground of
the city, unless specially authorized by resolution of Council.
(1923 Code, § 199)
§ 1476.02  TEMPORARY OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to erect, construct or repair any building or structure
in the city and desiring or intending to temporarily blockade the sidewalk,
street or alley abutting upon the property during the construction or repair,
shall apply to the Mayor for a permit to blockade the sidewalk or alley. Upon
the granting of such permit, not more than one-half of the sidewalk and one-
third of the street or alley shall be so occupied and a free and unobstructed
passage not less than two feet wide shall be kept open on or adjacent to the
sidewalk at all times. The gutters shall at all times be kept open for the free
and unobstructed passage of water therein. When the construction or repairs are
completed, all materials and debris must be at once removed from the sidewalk,
street or alley.
(1923 Code, § 201)
§ 1476.03  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS OVER SIDEWALKS.
   All fences, awning frames or other projections constructed, suspended, hung
or placed within, on or above any sidewalk in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, within 30 days after notification by the
Mayor, be removed by the owner of the construction; and in case of neglect or
refusal on the part of the person so notified, the same shall be done by the
city at the expense of the owner thereof, and the expense of the removal
certified for collection from the owner. This remedy shall be in addition to
the penalties provided in §
1476.99.
(1923 Code, § 203)  (Ord. 21-2008, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 1476.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(1986 Code, § 1361.99)
CHAPTER 1480:  SIGNS
Section
   
1480.01   Construction of language
   
1480.02   Definitions
   
1480.03   General provisions
   
1480.04   Exceptions
   
1480.05   Sign permit required
   
1480.06   Erection requirements for all signs
   
1480.07   Approved plastics for signs
   
1480.08   Approved materials for trim
   
1480.09   Signs not to constitute a traffic or safety hazard
   
1480.10   Clearance from high voltage power lines
   
1480.11   Signs prohibited on public property; exception
   
1480.12   R Residential Districts
   
1480.13   B-1 Neighborhood Business District and OS-1 Office Service Districts
   
1480.14   B-2 Central Business Districts, B-3 Highway Service Business District
and I Industrial Districts
   
1480.15   Roof signs
   
1480.16   Wall sign
   
1480.17   Projecting signs
   
1480.18   Electric signs
   
1480.19   Combination signs
   
1480.20   Pole signs
   
1480.21   Marquees
   
1480.22   Pylon signs
   
1480.23   Administration and enforcement
   
1480.24   Removal of unsafe and unlawful signs
   
1480.25   Nonconforming signs
   
1480.26   Sign fee schedule
   
1480.27   Sign erector's registration
 
   
1480.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Advertising on traffic-control devices, see §
414.07
   Placement of signs on city property, see §
642.15
   Signs on windshields, see §
438.23
   Street name and traffic-control signs in subdivisions, see §
1248.03
   Zoning requirements for signs, see §
1296.16
Statutory reference:
   Advertising on state and interstate highways, see R.C. Ch. 5516
   Power to regulate fences, billboards and signs, see R.C. § 715.27
§ 1480.01  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
   (a)   The following rules of construction shall apply to the provisions of
this chapter:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implications between the
provision of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the provisions shall
control.
      (3)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word “may” is permissive.
      (4)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular numbers shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      (5)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”, “intended for”,
“maintained for” or “occupied for”.
      (6)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted
as follows:
         A.   “And” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply.
         B.   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply.
         C.   “Either/or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
         D.   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   “Approved combustible material.”  Wood or materials not more
combustible than wood and approved plastics.
   (b)   “Approved plastics.”  Includes slow- burning plastics such as
cellulose, acetate or other plastics of no greater combustibility, as approved
by the Fire Chief.
   (c)   “Billboard.” A sign used to advertise a business, commodity, or
service which is conducted elsewhere than on the premises on which the
billboard is located. “Billboards” may have an engineered structural frame, in
accordance with the Ohio Building Code, or may be a pole sign or wall sign
type.
   (d)   “Zoning Inspector.”  Zoning Inspector as defined in
Chapter 1262 of these Codified Ordinances, or other person authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   “Building setback line.”  A line defining the minimum front, side and
rear yard setback requirements established in the Zoning Ordinance, and in
which no building or structure may be located, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (f)   “Curbline.”  A line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or
roadway. In absence of a curb, the curbline shall be established by the
Engineering Department.
   (g)   “Display surface.”  The area made available by the sign structure for
the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
   (h)   “Incombustible material.”  Any material which will not ignite at or
below a temperature of 1,200°F, during an exposure of five minutes, and which
will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
   (i)   “Licensed sign erector.”  Any person, firm or corporation who has
registered with the city in accordance with
Chapter  1468 and who is qualified to erect and service all types of signs
covered by the provisions of this chapter.
   (j)   “Marquee.”  Any board or awning of permanent construction attached to
and projecting from the exterior wall of a building over public property.
   (k)   “Off-premises sign.”  A sign used to advertise a business, commodity,
or service located off the premises on which the sign is located. Off- premises
signs may have an engineered structural frame, in accordance with the Ohio
Building Code, or may be a pole sign or wall sign type.
   (l)   “Projection.”  The total distance by which a sign extends over public
property and beyond the face of a building or beyond the building setback line.
   (m)   “Sign.”  Any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wood, plaster,
stone, plastic or other material of any kind or character whatsoever which
shall be used to attract attention to any object, product, place activity,
person, institution  organization or business. The term “place” includes the
erecting, construction, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing,
stacking, carrying or fastening or making visible in any manner whatsoever. For
the purpose of this chapter the word “sign” shall not include the flag, pennant
or insignia of any government, religious or educational organization. A “sign”
shall include the following types:
      (1)   “Combination sign.” A sign which incorporates any combination of
the features of a pole sign, projecting sign and a roof sign.
      (2)   “Electric sign.” Sign containing electrical wiring which has
characters, letters, figures, designs, faces or backgrounds illuminated by
incandescent or fluorescent lamps or luminous tubes attached as part of the
sign. For the purposes of this chapter, “electrical signs” shall not include
signs illuminated by an exterior light source.
      (3)   “Pole sign.”  A sign wholly supported by a sign structure placed in
the ground.
      (4)   “Projecting sign.”  A sign other than a wall sign which projects
from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.
      (5)   “Pylon sign.”  A sign within an enclosed base where the base
appears to be an integral part of the sign and set in concrete slab with the
superstructure enclosed, giving the appearance that the sign is placed upon the
ground.
      (6)   “Roof sign.”  A sign which is attached to roof framing, walls and/
or columns of a building or structure on which the entire advertising display
is above the roof level of a building or structure.
      (7)   “Wall sign.” A sign attached to or erected against the exterior
wall of a building or structure, or which is an integral part of the building
or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the
plane of such wall of the building or structure.
      (8)   “Awning/canopy sign.”  A sign in which letters or logos are applied
to a canopy or awning.
   (n)   “Sign structure.” The supports, uprights, braces and framework used to
support any of the types of signs as defined in this chapter. A “sign
structure” may be a single pole and may be an integral part of a building or
other structure.
   (o)   “Temporary sign.”  A sign made of cloth, plastic, wood or other
approved material which is not permanently attached to a building or which is
temporarily anchored into or onto the ground or a sign which directs attention
to a special sale or event at the same location where the sign is placed, such
as “changeable letter sunflower signs.”
   (p)    “Safety strip.”  A strip of land parallel to and abutting a public
dedicated street, controlling the access onto the property, and located between
the edge of the sidewalk and the curb.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   No sign shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, structurally
altered or arranged for any purposes other than in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. A sign which was erected before the adoption of
this chapter shall not be rebuilt or relocated without conforming to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of §
1480.03 shall not apply to the following types of signs:
   (a)   Temporary signs in Business Districts including: B-1 (Neighborhood
Business District), B-2 (Central Business District, B-3 Highway Service
Business District, OS-1 Office Service District, I-1 (Light Industrial and
Manufacturing District), I-2 (Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing District).
      (1)   Real estate signs not over ten square feet in area which advertise
only the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
      (2)   Bulletin boards not over 20 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when such bulletin board is located on the
premises of such institutions.
      (3)   Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor, when placed
upon work under construction, and not exceeding 40 square feet in area.
      (4)   Advertising copy or message on a painted, printed or changeable
letter sign.
      (5)   Repainting, cleaning or repair maintenance which does not involve
an alteration or change in the structural members of the sign or an increase in
the total advertising area of the sign.
      (6)   Any sign denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institution, other building or dwelling and not
exceeding three total square feet in area.
      (7)   Projecting signs not more than one and one-half total square feet
in area.
      (8)   Non-electric signs six square feet or less which are mounted on a
building or six square feet or less mounted in the ground with a maximum height
of six feet.
   (b)   Temporary signs which require a permit.
      (1)   Sunflower or other rented changeable letter signs.
      (2)   Any other temporary sign not covered under division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   General provisions.
      (1)   All temporary signs under division (a) of this section which
promote a special sale or event may be placed not more than 30 days before the
initial date of the sale or event and shall he removed not more than five days
after such special sale or event. Temporary signs requiring a permit shall be
placed not more than 30 days from date of permit and shall be removed not more
than five days after the expiration of such permit.
      (2)   No banners or pennants shall be allowed unless used as a temporary
business/announcement sign.
      (3)   All temporary signs which existed prior to the date of this chapter
shall be removed within 30 days of the date that this new chapter is adopted.
      (4)   All temporary signs shall further comply with the provisions of §
1480.23.
   (d)   Historic preservation.  Signs and marquees which (1) maintain and
enhance the distinctive character of historical areas and properties, or (2)
safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving sights, structures or portions
thereof which reflect elements of the city's cultural, social or architectural
heritage, upon application to and approval by the Zoning Inspector, and the
Community and Economic Development Coordinator as to the applicant's proposed
location, construction and erection thereof.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.05  SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before erecting, converting, enlarging, reconstructing, structurally
altering or rearranging any sign, application shall be made in writing upon a
form furnished by the Zoning Inspector. The application shall include the
following information:
   (a)   Name and address of the property owner and the licensed sign erector.
   (b)   The location by street and number, dimensions, height and design of
the sign.
   (c)   Plans showing the definite dimensions, method of construction,
installation and support.
   (d)   Substantiating evidence that the sign erector is licensed, as defined
in §
1480.02.
   (e)   Other pertinent data as may be required by the Zoning Inspector to
determine and provide for the enforcement of the chapter.
   (f)   No fee shall be charged for the replacement, rehanging, or redisplay
of a sign face original which constitutes a conforming use. However,
application for permit and a drawing must still be submitted to inform the
Zoning Inspector of such change. If the sign structure is altered a permit will
be required.
   (g)   A letter of consent from and signed by the owner of a building or
parcel of land shall be submitted at the time of the application for all off-
premises billboard signs.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.06  ERECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the Ohio Building Code and
applicable electrical regulations and shall be subject to building and
electrical inspection by the Richland County Department of Building
Regulations.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.07  APPROVED PLASTICS FOR SIGNS.
   Approved plastics as defined and approved by the Richland County Department
of Building Regulations may be used as the display surface material and for the
letters and decorations and facings on signs and outdoor display structures
provided that the structure on which the plastic is mounted or installed is
noncombustible.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.08  APPROVED MATERIALS FOR TRIM.
   Nonstructural trim may be made of metal, wood or approved plastics or any
combination thereof. Facings, letters and decorations of all types of signs may
be made of metal or approved plastics. Facings, letters and decorations of
signs other than electric signs may be made of wood.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.09  SIGNS NOT TO CONSTITUTE A TRAFFIC OR SAFETY HAZARD.
   (a)   No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street or public
way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location
where by reason of the position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct
the view or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or
which makes use of the words “stop”, “look”, “drive in”, “danger” or any other
word, phrase or symbol in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse the movement of traffic on any street or public way.
   (b)   Signs shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as not to
obstruct any fire escape, window, door or other opening; or so as to prevent
free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall
be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape, or shall be so
placed as to interfere with an opening which is required for legal ventilation.
§ 1480.10  CLEARANCE FROM HIGH VOLTAGE POWER LINES.
   (a)   Signs shall be located not less than eight feet horizontally or 12
feet vertically from overhead electric conductors which arc energized in excess
of 750 volts. “Overhead electric conductors,” as used in this chapter, means
any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground,
except such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering
of equal strength.
   (b)   Projection over alleys.  No sign or sign structure shall project into
any public alley below a height of 14 feet above grade, nor project more than 
12 inches where the sign structure is located 14 feet to 16 feet above grade.
The sign or sign structure may project not more than 36 inches into the public
alley where the sign or sign structure is located more than 16 feet above
grade.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.11  SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; EXCEPTION.
   (a)   No sign or sign structure shall be placed or constructed directly upon
a sidewalk, curb, safety strip, street, alley or any other public property.
Notwithstanding the following exceptions:
      (1)   Real estate open house directional signs complying with
specifications furnished by the city shall be permitted to be placed within the
public right-of-way if they are placed so as not to obscure traffic or
constitute a safety hazard and subject to the following restrictions:
         A.   Signs shall be installed no earlier than one week before the open
house event;
         B.   Only one directional sign shall be permitted at any street
intersection; and
         C.   If the property owner adjacent to the public right-of-way objects
to the placement of a sign in front of his or her property, the sign shall be
removed; and same shall assume full responsibility and liability for any and
all losses, damages and injuries which may arise in any manner whatsoever,
whether anticipated or unanticipated, from the placement or presence of such
sign in the public right- of-way.
      (2)   Within the Central Business District, nonpermanent, free-standing
signs, not greater than three feet wide or one-half the width of the sidewalk
and four feet tall, may be placed upon the sidewalks.
      (3)   Temporary across-the-street banners promoting civic events shall be
permitted at certain designated points by permit issued by the Mayor.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.12  R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Permitted types of signs.  The following signs are permitted in all R
Residential Districts.
      (1)   Temporary signs including and limited to:
         A.   Real estate signs advertising the development of the premises
upon which it stands or pertaining to the sale, lease or rent of a particular
building property or premises upon which it is displayed.
         B.   Bulletin boards for churches, schools, community centers or other
public or institutional building.
         C.   Name plates denoting the name of a residence or the name and
occupation for a home occupation as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. No permit
required.
         D.   Signs incidental to legal process and necessary to the public
safety or welfare.
         E.   One identification sign indicating the name and address of a
multi-family apartment building or development. Such signs shall not exceed 40
square feet. These signs shall not be internally illuminated; however,
illuminating the face of the sign with an external source is permitted,
providing it does not create a glare on adjacent properties or create a traffic
hazard. The light source shall be screened so it is not visible from the
street. Electrical permits are required for all illuminated signs.
         F.   Temporary business or charitable event signs may be permitted in
a residential district, but must be no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches in
size or of the real estate variety in metal frames and not displayed longer
than 30 days in a six-month period.  Each six-month period is from January
through June and from July through December. No permit required.
         G.   Temporary event signs, signs communicating support for sports
teams, U.S. Armed Forces, or other non-business related communication may be
permitted. No permit required.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Signs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any lot within an
R Residential District.
      (2)   If such signs are illuminated, indirect lighting only shall be
used, the source of light shall not be visible from any street and no flashing
or intermittent illumination shall be employed.
      (3)   Any sign, electric sign, pole sign and projecting sign shall be
designed in accordance with all other provisions of this chapter, governing the
location, construction and size of such signs.
   (c)   Prohibited types of signs.  Billboard/off-premises signs are
prohibited in R Residential, or any property developed for residential use. Any
other signs not listed in division (a) of this section, “permitted types of
signs,” are also prohibited.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.13  B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT AND OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Permitted types of signs.  The following types of signs are permitted
in all B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts and OS-1 Office Service Districts.
      (1)   Temporary signs as permitted in an R Residential District.
      (2)   Any of the following types of signs which are designed to advertise
a business or service conducted on the premises, or products, merchandise or
commodities stocked or sold on the premises:
         A.   Wall sign;
         B.   Electric sign;
         C.   Pole sign;
         D.   Projecting sign;
         E.   Awning/canopy signs.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Signs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any lot within an
R Residential District.
      (2)   If such signs are illuminated, indirect lighting only shall be
used, the source of light shall not be visible from any street and no flashing
or intermittent illumination shall be employed.
      (3)   Any wall sign, electric sign, pole sign and projecting sign shall
be designed in accordance with all other provisions of this chapter, governing
the location, construction and size of such signs.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.14  B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS, B-3 HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS
DISTRICT AND I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Permitted types of signs.  The following types of signs are permitted
in all B-2 Central Business Districts, B-3 Highway Service Business District
and I Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Temporary signs.
      (2)   Any of the following types of signs which are designed to advertise
a business or service conducted on or off-premises, or products, merchandise or
commodities stocked or sold on or off- premises:
         A.   Wall sign;
         B.   Electric sign;
         C.   Pole sign;
         D.   Projecting sign;
         E.   Roof sign;
         F.   Combination sign;
         G.   Pylon sign;
         H.   Awning or canopy sign.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Signs shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any lot within an
R Residential District.
      (2)   All signs shall be designed in accordance with all other provisions
of this chapter governing the location, construction and size of such signs.
      (3)   On-premises signs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any
lot within an R Residential District.
      (4)   Off-premises signs shall comply with the following:
         A.   Wall-mounted off- premises signs shall be limited to only one per
block face for each direction of travel and one per building. Block faces shall
not include alleys.
         B.   All off-premises pole signs or other ground-supported signs shall
be spaced no closer than 250 feet to any other off-premises sign along or
across the street right-of-way.
         C.   All off-premises signs shall be spaced no closer than 250 feet to
any lot zoned R-1, R-2 or developed for one or two family, measured along the
right-of-way.
         D.   No lot developed for one or two family in a B-2, B-3 or I zoned
district shall be permitted to erect an off-premises sign.
      (5)   All signs shall be designed in accordance with all other provisions
of this chapter governing the location, construction and size of such signs.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.15  ROOF SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  No roof sign shall have a surface exceeding 300 total
square feet or 5% of the total roof area of the combined building on the site,
or have its highest point extended more than a distance equal to the sign's
longest horizontal dimension, but in no case shall the height exceed 50 feet
above the roof.
   (b)   Construction.
      (1)   Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron
or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. When erected upon
buildings which are not constructed entirely for fireproof material, the
bearing plates of such sign shall be fastened or attached directly upon the
masonry walls and intermediate steel columns in the building or structure. No
roof sign shall be supported or anchored to a wooden framework of a building or
other structure.
      (2)   Roof signs, including the uprights, supports and braces thereof,
shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, provided, however, that
facings, figures, decorations, and structural trim thereof may be made of
combustible materials approved by the Richland County Department of Building
Regulations and Fire Chief.
   (c)   Erection.
      (1)   Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frame of
the building over which they are constructed and erected so that they will
safely sustain wind pressures in accordance with the Richland County Department
of Building Regulations.
      (2)   No roof sign shall be erected in a manner which prevents free
passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof.
      (3)   Roof signs shall have a passage clear of all obstructions under or
around and immediately adjacent to all roof signs exceeding a height of five
feet above the level of the roof. Such passages shall be not less than three
feet wide and four feet high measured from the level of the roof. If the roof
sign is mounted or placed at right angles to the face of the building, such
passageway shall be within 20 feet of the building face.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.16  WALL SIGN.
   (a)   Location.  No wall sign shall be permitted to extend more than 12
inches beyond the building lace and shall not project beyond the ends or top of
the building wall to which it is attached.
   (b)   Construction.
      (1)   Wall signs attached to exterior walls of solid masonry or concrete
shall be safely and securely attached as approved by the Richland County
Department of Building Regulations.
      (2)   Wall signs attached to wood walls may be supported by methods
approved by the Richland County Department of Building Regulations.
   (c)   Erection.  No wall sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress
to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.17  PROJECTING SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  Within any B-2 Central Business District or  B-3 Highway
Service Business District projecting signs shall be placed at least eight feet
above the public right-of-way over which it is erected and shall not project to
a point less than two feet from the curbline of any street or alley. In every
B-1 Neighborhood Business District projecting signs shall be at least nine feet
above the public right-of-way over which it is erected and shall not project to
a point less than two feet from the curbline of any street or alley.
   (b)   Construction.
      (1)   All projecting signs shall be constructed of metal or other equally
noncombustible material. Approved plastics may be approved for use.
      (2)   Every projecting sign shall be securely attached to the building by
methods approved by the Richland County Department of Building Regulations.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.18  ELECTRIC SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  The placement or location of electrical signs shall be
subject to the regulations for that type of sign.
   (b)   Construction.
      (1)   Electrical signs shall be constructed in accordance with the
Standards for Electrical Signs of the National Electrical Code adopted under
Chapter 1424.
      (2)   Electrical signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials,
provided, however, that facings, letters, figures, decorations and structural
trim thereof may be made of approved plastics.
      (3)   No electrical signs shall be erected or installed without prior
ground inspection by the Richland County Department of Building Regulations.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.19  COMBINATION SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  Each part of a combination sign shall be subject to the
regulations for that type of sign.
   (b)   Construction.  All supports of combination signs shall be placed in or
upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in
accordance with the provisions for construction of a projecting sign if a
combination sign includes any of the features of a projecting sign or in
accordance with the provisions for construction of a pole sign where a
combination sign includes any of the features of a pole sign.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.20  POLE SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  Pole signs shall not exceed a height of 60 feet measured
from the finished grade of the ground where the sign is placed. Any sign
exceeding 60 feet shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning
Commission. All pole signs shall be supported by a metal or steel pole of not
less than nine feet high measured between the base line of such sign and the
ground level.
   (b)   Erection.  All pole signs shall be designed to withstand the wind
pressure load requirements as directed by the Richland County Department of
Building Regulations.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.21  MARQUEES.
   (a)   Location.  No portion of a marquee shall be less than ten feet above
the level of the sidewalk nor shall it extend farther than 24 inches from the
curbline.
   (b)   Construction.  Marquees shall be supported solely by the building or
structure to which they are attached and no columns or posts shall be permitted
as support thereof. The framework of any marquee shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with the Ohio Building Code as may be amended from
time to time.
   (c)   Erection.  All frames and supports shall be on metal and designed to
withstand the wind pressure requirements as provided in Section 1112 of the
Ohio Building Code as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.22  PYLON SIGNS.
   (a)   Location.  Pylon signs shall not exceed a height of 40 feet measured
from the finished grade of the ground where the sign is placed.
   (b)   Erection.  No pylon sign is to be erected until the excavation for
foundation or foundations has been inspected by the authorized officer of the
Richland County Department of Building Regulations.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.23  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Any firm, business or person who discontinues a business, vacates the
premises or moves his place of business to a new location shall be required to
remove all political signs, Christmas tree signs and any other signs or
advertising media from the premises the firm, business or person has vacated.
All signs and sign structures shall be removed from the premises within 30 days
from the date such premises are to be vacated.
   (b)   If the Zoning Inspector finds that any firm, business or person has
failed to comply with the provisions of §
1480.16, he or she shall give immediate written notice to the firm, business or
person for whom the sign was erected or to the property owner of the vacated
premises upon which the sign is located. If the firm, business or person fails
to remove or dismantle the sign so as to comply with the provision of this
section within ten days after such notice, such sign may be removed by the
Zoning Inspector at the expense of that person.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.24  REMOVAL OF UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   If the Zoning Inspector finds that any sign is unsafe or hazardous, or has
been constructed or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, he or she shall give immediate written notice to the person for who or
by whom the sign is erected or to the owner of the property upon which the sign
is located. If the person fails to remove, repair or alter the sign so as to
comply with the provisions of this chapter within ten days after such notice,
such sign may be removed, repaired or altered by the Zoning Inspector at the
expense of that person. The Zoning Inspector may cause any sign which is of
immediate peril to persons or property, or erected or placed in violation with
the provision of this chapter to summarily be removed without notice.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.25  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   The provisions of §§
1480.23 and
1480.24 shall be applicable to all signs and provided further, that any sign
which is at any time found to be unsafe or unsecure or which is an immediate
peril to person or property shall be removed, repaired or altered in accordance
with §§
1480.23 and
1480.24, provided, however, that if a nonconforming sign is replaced by another
sign, such replacement sign must conform with the provisions of this chapter;
likewise, a nonconforming sign which is removed or altered so as to
substantially change the size, appearance or nature of the sign, must conform
to the provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.26  SIGN FEE SCHEDULE.
   Fees for the issuance of permits for signs as provided for in §
1480.05 shall be collected by the Zoning Inspector in advance of issuing a
permit. The amount of such fees shall be as follows:
   (a)   Any sign 10 sq. ft. or less   $10.00
   (b)   Any sign more than 10 sq. ft.:    $25.00 + $1.00/100 sq. ft.
   (c)   Any sign more than 10 sq. ft. and more than 20 feet in height:
   $50.00 + $1.00/100 sq. ft.
   (d)   All new or replacement illuminated signs shall require an electrical
permit from the Richland County Department of Building Regulations.
   (e)   Marquees shall be reviewed as a “building addition” and shall require
building and electrical permit fees relating to the size of the marquee.
   The Zoning Inspector shall deposit these fees with the Director of Finance
and Public Record to the credit of the General Fund.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.27  SIGN ERECTOR'S REGISTRATION.
   In order to operate within the city, a sign erector shall be registered with
the Bureau of Buildings, Codes and Permits in accordance with the requirements
of
Chapter 1468.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1480.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   In addition to the provisions of §§
1480.23 to
1480.25, whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 4-2012, passed 5-7-2012)
CHAPTER 1482:  SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
1482.01   Definitions
   
1482.02   Purpose
   
1482.03   Construction of residential pools; permit required
   
1482.04   Plans and specifications required
   
1482.05   Illumination
   
1482.06   Fences; retractable-step pools
   
1482.07   Walk area
   
1482.08   Location and area of pools
   
1482.09   Inspections; orders to correct; equitable remedies
 
   
1482.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Fences generally, see
Ch. 1462
   Municipal swimming pools, see
Ch. 1066
   Peace disturbances, see
Ch. 648
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on liability of landowners, see R.C. § 1533.181
§ 1482.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Permanent residential swimming pool.” An artificial body of water,
permanently installed, used or intended to be used solely by the owner or
lessee thereof and his or her family and by friends invited to use it without
payment of any fee.
   (b)   “Pool.” An excavation, depression, construction, receptacle or
container designed or constructed to hold or retain water, having a minimum
size of 200 square feet and being over 24 inches deep at any point.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.02  PURPOSE.
   The health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city are best
protected by the provisions of this chapter governing the construction and use
of swimming pools.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.03  CONSTRUCTION OF RESIDENTIAL POOLS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No residential pool shall be installed, constructed or used without the
owner of the property upon which the pool is to be constructed or installed, or
his or her agent, first obtaining a permit therefor from the Richland County
Department of Building Regulations.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.04  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the owner or agent shall
comply with the provisions of the city zoning regulations.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.05  ILLUMINATION.
   Any lights used to illuminate a pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to
reflect light away from adjoining premises and public streets.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.06  FENCES; RETRACTABLE-STEP POOLS.
   All private residential below-the-ground swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the pool. All fence openings
or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates.
The fence and gates shall not be less than four feet, six inches and not over
six feet in height above grade level, and shall be constructed of not less than
a number nine (9 AWG) gauge corrosion resistant woven wire mesh material, or
equivalent material approved by the County Department of Building Regulations.
All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed
at top of the gate and made inaccessible to small children. All fence posts
shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.  The
retractable steps of an above-the-ground pool shall be removed or ingress into
the pool locked so as to prevent a child from crawling or otherwise entering
into the pool.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.07  WALK AREA.
   Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided to
extend entirely around a below-the-ground pool. The walk area shall be
constructed of impervious material and the surface shall be with a non-slip
finish. Walks shall have a pitch of one-quarter inch to a foot away from the
pool and to have a gutter alongside the walk for drainage purposes.
(Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.08  LOCATION AND AREA OF POOLS.
   No pool shall be constructed, installed or erected in front of a building
setback line, nor shall a pool occupy an area greater than 10% of the lot area,
nor shall a pool be closer than five feet to any lot side line or rear line.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.09  INSPECTIONS; ORDERS TO CORRECT; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   The County Department of Building Regulations Health Commissioner shall
inspect or cause to be inspected all pools at such times as they, the Zoning
Inspector, or any of them may deem necessary to carry out the purpose of this
chapter. They, or their duly authorized representatives, are hereby authorized
to enter upon any premises, private or public, to take samples of water from
the pools at such times as they may deem necessary and to require the owner,
proprietor or operator to comply with the provisions of this chapter. In the
event of noncompliance, after due notice with any provision of this chapter,
either the County Department of Building Regulations, the Health Commissioner
or Zoning Inspector has the power to abate or cause a suspension of the use of
a pool until such time as the same is, in their opinion, or in the opinion of
either of them, no longer a menace or a hazard to health, safety or morals.
Such remedies shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
1482.99.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 1482.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 8-77, passed 5-16-1977; Ord. 9-2012, passed 6-4-2012)
CHAPTER 1484:  SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
Section
   
1484.01   Definitions
   
1484.02   Permit required
   
1484.03   Permit application
   
1484.04   Location
   
1484.05   Permit fee
 
   
1484.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Property defined to include cable television service, see §
606.01
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
672.06
   Services defined to include cable television service, see §
642.01
Statutory reference:
   Action by cable television system owner or operator for damages, see R.C. §
2307.62
   Interrupting or impairing television, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Possession or sale of unauthorized cable television devices, see R.C. §
2913.041
§ 1484.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, "dish antenna" means a combination of one or more
of the following:
   (a)   An antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication
or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources.
   (b)   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of
the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals.
   (c)   A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the
interior of a building. 
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
§ 1484.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall erect a dish antenna without a permit
nor shall installation or erection commence before a permit is issued.
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
§ 1484.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   The owner or the occupant with written permission of the owner, of any
parcel of land within the city, who desires to construct or erect a dish
antenna on the parcel, must first obtain a permit therefor from the city.
   (b)   The city shall issue such a permit if the applicant therefor submits a
written application therefor, together with a plot plan of the lot or parcel of
land, showing the exact location of the proposed dish antenna, the location of
all existing buildings on the lot or parcel, a description of the kind of dish
antenna proposed, and complete construction plans and specifications showing
proposed methods of installation, structural engineering analysis and the
elevation of the proposed dish antenna upon completion.
   (c)   The applicant shall also present documentation of the possession of
any license required by any federal, state or local agency pertaining to the
ownership and/or operation of dish antennas.
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
§ 1484.04  LOCATION.
   No dish antenna shall be constructed or erected in any front or side yard. A
dish antenna may only be constructed or erected to the rear of the residence or
main structure on the premises. No dish antenna shall be constructed or erected
less than five feet from any property line. No dish antenna shall be
constructed or erected without appropriate landscaping or fencing to reasonably
conceal the dish antenna from view.
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
§ 1484.05  PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for the dish antenna shall be $20.
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
§ 1484.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 14-84, passed 6-4-1984)
CHAPTER 1486:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1486.01   Authority and title
   
1486.02   Purpose
   
1486.03   Definitions
   
1486.04   Scope
   
1486.05   Requirements
   
1486.06   Waivers
   
1486.07   Plan review
   
1486.08   Permits
   
1486.09   Fees
   
1486.10   Assurance of completion
   
1486.11   Disclaimer of liability
   
1486.12   Inspections; notification of violations
   
1486.13   Calculating stormwater runoff
   
1486.14   Stormwater runoff control criteria
   
1486.15   Preparing a stormwater management plan
   
1486.16   Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and control structures
   
1486.17   Compliance required
 
   
1486.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Drainage channels, see §
1296.06
   Drainage in subdivisions, see §
1246.04(f)(1)
   Filling and draining of lots, cellars and the like; removal  of putrid
substances and obstructions, see §
660.11
   Gutters and downspouts, see §
1490.13
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
   Stormwater drainage, see §
1042.11
§ 1486.01  AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
   (a)   This chapter has been adopted under authority of Article XVIII, § 3,
of the Ohio Constitution.
   (b)   The official title of this chapter shall be the "City of Shelby
Stormwater Management Rules and Regulations".  However, "Stormwater Rules and
Regulations" may be used as a short title.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.02  PURPOSE.
   (a)   This chapter has been adopted for the purpose of establishing feasible
and economically reasonable standards to achieve a level of management and
conservation practices which will abate erosion of the soil and abate the
degradation of the waters of the state by soil sediment in conjunction with
nonfarm, earth-disturbing activities.
   (b)   It is further the intent of this chapter to:
      (1)   Permit development without increasing downstream flooding, erosion
or sedimentation;
      (2)   Reduce damage to receiving streams and impairment of their capacity
which may be caused by increases in the quantity and/or rate of water
discharged; and
      (3)   Establish a basis for the design of all storm drainage systems
which will preserve the rights and options of both the dominant and servient
property owners and help assure the long-term adequacy of storm drainage
systems.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.03  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, certain rules or word usages apply to
the text as follows:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
      (2)   The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.
      (3)   Any word or term not interpreted or defined by the section,
division or paragraph shall be used with a meaning of common or standard
utilization, so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Development area." Any contiguous (abutting) area owned by one
person or operated as one development unit and used or being developed for
nonfarm commercial, industrial, residential or other nonfarm purposes, upon
which earth-disturbing activities are planned or underway.
      (2)   "Drainage area," also called "catchment area," "watershed" and
"river basin."
         A.   The contributing area to a single drainage basin, expressed in
acres, square miles or another unit of area; or
         B.   The area served by a drainage system receiving storm and surface
water or by a watercourse.
      (3)   "Earth-disturbing activity." Any grading, excavating, filling or
other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or man-made ground cover
is destroyed and which may result in increased rate and/or volume of runoff
and/or contribute to erosion and sediment pollution.
      (4)   "Flood." A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas.
      (5)   "Person." Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state
agency or the federal government, or any combination thereof.
      (6)   "Post-development." The state or condition of the earth's surface
after urbanization occurs.  Other terms are "developed," "future" and "after
development."
      (7)   "Pre-development." The state or condition of the earth's surface
averaged over the last five years prior to urbanization.  Other terms are
"developed," "present" and "before development."
      (8)   "Storm drainage system." The surface and subsurface system for the
removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams,
gullies, ravines, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or
continuous nature, and man-made elements, which include conduits and
appurtenant features, culverts, ditches, channels, storage facilities, streets
and the storm sewer systems.
      (9)   "Stormwater management facilities." The drainage system and control
facilities necessary to meet the runoff criteria of these regulations.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.04  SCOPE.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to all earth-disturbing activities performed
on land used or being developed for commercial, industrial, residential,
recreational, public service or other nonfarm purposes, which are within the
jurisdiction of the city, unless otherwise excluded within this chapter or
unless expressly excluded by state law.
   (b)   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Strip mining operations regulated under R.C. Chapter 1513;
      (2)   Surface mining operations regulated under R.C. Chapter 1514;
      (3)   Public transportation, utilities and drainage improvements or
maintenance thereof undertaken by a government agency or political subdivision;
or
      (4)   Earth-disturbing activities involving less than 1,000 square feet.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.05  REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Any person performing any nonfarm, earth-disturbing activity that
disturbs 20,000 square feet or more shall be required to file a stormwater
management plan and obtain a stormwater management permit.
   (b)   Any person performing any nonfarm, earth-disturbing activity that
disturbs less than 20,000 square feet is required to obtain a stormwater
management permit, but is not required to submit a stormwater management plan. 
However, all nonfarm, earth-disturbing activities are required to comply with
all other criteria as outlined in this chapter.  Therefore, the Director of
Public Service should be contacted to see what type of controls are necessary
to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.06  WAIVERS.
   (a)   Certain earth-disturbing activities not automatically subject to
exemptions by §
1486.04 may exist such that the submission of a stormwater control plan serves
no real purpose.  This activity shall be eligible for a waiver from the
requirement of submitting a plan and/or other requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   To obtain a waiver, a person shall submit a written request to the
Director of Public Service.  This request shall include sufficient data to
determine that granting a waiver will not result in excessive stormwater runoff
or rate of runoff.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.07  PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service shall review the stormwater management
plan within 30 days of receipt and indicate approval or disapproval to the
person who filed the plan.  Any indication of disapproval shall include the
plan deficiencies and the procedure for filing a revised plan.  Pending
preparation and approval of a revised plan, earth-disturbing activities shall
not be allowed until the deficiencies have been properly addressed and an
acceptable plan has been filed and approved.
   (b)   During the plan review, the Director of Public Service may request
recommendations pertaining to the proposed plan from the Richland County Soil
and Water Conservation District, the City Engineer and the City Planning
Commission.  The City Engineer shall be responsible for review and approval of
all hydrological and runoff calculations, as well as design and construction
inspection, for all stormwater management facilities.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.08  PERMITS.
   (a)   Permit application forms will be made available in the office of the
Director of Public Service.  Information required will be sufficient for the
Director of Public Service to determine if a stormwater management plan is
necessary and that the person intends to comply with this chapter.  At a
minimum, the application shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner and/or
other persons responsible for the activity;
      (2)   The location of the activity;
      (3)   A description of the activity, including:
         A.   The type of activity;
         B.   The area to be disturbed;
         C.   The area to be rendered permanently impervious; and
         D.   The size of the parcel or lot on which the activity will occur.
      (4)   If no plan is required, a signed statement that the responsible
person will comply with this chapter.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service will review the permit application and,
if no stormwater management plan is required, issue a permit within 30 days,
provided that all other applicable criteria of this chapter are satisfied.
   (c)   In the event that a plan is required, the permit will be issued upon
approval of detail design, payment of required review inspection fees and
posting of required bonds.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.09  FEES.
   (a)   Permit fees. 
      (1)   A permit fee in the amount of $25 shall be paid to the Director of
Finance and Public Record when a permit is issued.
      (2)   No permit fee will be required for nonfarm, earth-disturbing
activities which have been provided for in an already-approved stormwater
management plan (i.e., home construction on a lot in an approved subdivision
with an approved stormwater management plan).
   (b)   Plan checking and field inspection fees. 
      (1)   A person who obtains a stormwater management permit, upon approval
of a stormwater management plan which involves design and construction of
stormwater management facilities, shall submit design plans, quantities and
itemized cost estimates for the facilities, prepared by a registered
professional engineer or registered professional architect, to the City
Engineer for review and approval.  A certified check in the amount of $150, or
1% of the project construction cost estimates, whichever is greater, not to
exceed $5,000, shall be paid to the Director of Finance and Public Record
before issuance of the stormwater management permit, to offset the costs of
plan review and field inspection of the construction to assure its conformity
to the plans. A record shall be kept of the actual costs incurred by the City
Engineer for the inspection.  The costs shall be charged against the amount
deposited.  Any remaining money shall be returned to the developer.
      (2)   If the stormwater management facilities to be constructed are part
of a subdivision being developed under the Subdivision Regulations of the city,
and the filing, plan review and inspection fees for stormwater management
facilities are included under §
1242.05 of the Subdivision Regulations, then this provision of this chapter
shall be waived.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986; Ord. 35-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 1486.10  ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION.
   (a)   The assurance of completion of the stormwater drainage facilities and
control structures included in a stormwater management plan which has been
developed and approved under this chapter shall be satisfied by the furnishing
of a 100% performance bond.  The City Engineer shall approve the sufficiency of
the bond and the Director of Law shall approve the bond as to form.
   (b)   Storm drainage facilities and control structures that are being
constructed as part of a subdivision subject to the subdivision regulations of
the city shall be considered as an improvement.  As such, they shall be subject
to the bonding requirements therein, and this section of the stormwater
management regulations shall be waived.  The value of the stormwater drainage
facilities shall be included in the amount of the performance bond for the
subdivision improvements.
   (c)   If it can be shown that assurance of completion is being provided
through another regulation of this city or other governmental subdivisions,
this section of the stormwater management regulations shall be waived.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.11  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law,
nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.12  INSPECTIONS; NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Director of Public Service shall inspect land disturbance areas during
construction to determine compliance with this chapter.  If it is determined
that a violation of this chapter exists, the responsible person shall be
notified of the deficiencies or noncompliance by the Director of Public Service
in writing and by certified mail.  If, after one week from receipt of the
letter for compliance, the deficiency or noncompliance has not been corrected
or substantial steps taken to correct the same, the deficiency or noncompliance
shall be reported to the Director of Law for legal action.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.13  CALCULATING STORMWATER RUNOFF.
   One of the four methods described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Technical Release No. 55, by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture and its Ohio Supplement, shall be used to determine
stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.14  STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL CRITERIA.
   Stormwater runoff control addresses both peak rate and total volume of
runoff.
   (a)   The peak rate of runoff from an area after development shall not
exceed the peak rate of runoff from the same area before development for all
storms up to a 100-year frequency, 24-hour storm.  In addition, if it is found
that a proposed development will increase the volume of runoff from an area,
the peak rate of runoff from certain more frequent storms must be controlled
further.  There are two reasons why increases in volume of runoff require a
control standard more restrictive than controlling just the predevelopment
conditions.  First, increases in volume mean runoff will be flowing for a
longer period of time.  When routed through a watershed, these longer flows may
join at some point downstream, thereby creating peak flows and the problems
associated with peak flow (flooding).  This is known as the "routing problem". 
Second, longer flow periods of large runoff quantities place a highly erosive
stress on natural channels.  This stress can be minimized by reducing the rate
of discharge.  The permissible peak rate shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   Determine the total volume of runoff from a one-year frequency, 24-
hour storm occurring over the area before and after development.
      (2)   Determine the percent of increase in volume due to development and,
using this percentage, pick the critical storm from the following table:
 
Percentage of Increase in Volume of Runoff Critical Storm for Discharge
Equal to or Greater Than and Less Than     Limitation (yrs.) 
-   10  1
10  20  2
20  50  5
50  100 10
100 250 25
250 500 50
500 -   100
 
   (b)   The peak rate of runoff from the critical storm occurring over the
development shall not exceed the peak rate of runoff from a one-year frequency
storm occurring over the same area under predevelopment conditions.  Storms of
less frequent occurrence (longer return period) than the critical storm shall
have a peak rate of runoff not greater than for the same storm under
predevelopment conditions.  As an example, if the total volume is shown to be
increased by 35%, the critical storm is a five-year storm.  The peak rate of
runoff for all storms up to this intensity shall be controlled so as not to
exceed the peak rate of runoff from a one-year frequency storm under
predevelopment conditions in the area.  The runoff from a more intense storm
need only be controlled so as not to exceed the predevelopment peak rate from
the same frequency of storm.
   (c)   Storage volume does not have to be provided for off-site upstream
areas.  Flow from such areas will be routed through the drainage system in the
development under consideration at a rate determined in the same manner as the
on-site system.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.15  PREPARING A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (a)   A stormwater management plan is required for developments involving
20,000 square feet of earth-disturbing activity or more.
   (b)   The plan submission shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
a one inch = 100-foot scale topographic map with two-foot contour intervals,
drainage pattern and major soil types information, complete predevelopment and
postdevelopment drainage calculations and detailed engineering drawings,
specifications and estimates for the stormwater management control structures
and drainage facilities to be constructed as part of the development.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.16  MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES AND CONTROL
STRUCTURES.
   (a)   When stormwater drainage facilities and control structures are of a
permanent nature, the city may assume responsibility for the structures located
within the corporation limits once they have been constructed and accepted by
the city.  Funding for the maintenance of these major facilities may be by
assessment of property owners in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code.  The
maintenance of minor detention areas, such as swales and the like, on
individual parcels or lots in new subdivisions, shall be the responsibility of
the individual parcel or lot owners.  Special provisions shall be written into
the deeds for the individual parcels, or lots in new subdivisions, so that the
owners are aware that the parcels or lots are used for temporary stormwater
storage.  The city will require all of these stormwater drainage facilities and
control structures to be designed to minimize maintenance costs.
   (b)   The property owner or owners shall provide all necessary easements and
rights-of-way to the city in order to permit the maintenance and repair of the
required stormwater drainage facilities and control structures.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.17  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1486.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 23-86, passed 10-6-1986)
CHAPTER 1488:  HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND BUILDINGS
Section
   
1488.01   Statement of purpose
   
1488.02   Shelby Historic Preservation Commission
   
1488.03   Duties of the Commission
   
1488.04   Definitions
   
1488.05   Standards for designating a landmark
   
1488.06   Standards for designating a historic district
   
1488.07   Procedures for designation of individual landmarks
   
1488.08   Procedures for designation of historic districts
   
1488.09   Procedures for review of proposed alterations to historic landmarks
and properties within historic districts
 
   
1488.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A   The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
   
Appendix B   The National Register of Historic Places and the Ohio Historic
Inventory Defined
§ 1488.01  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is:
   (a)   To preserve the city’s distinctive character and its cultural, social,
residential, commercial, industrial, educational, political, or architectural
heritage for the enjoyment, enrichment, and benefit of the citizens of Shelby.
   (b)   To foster economic vitality by publicly encouraging both private and
public investment in the city’s older buildings, neighborhoods and districts.
   (c)   To foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the
past.
   (d)   To provide guidance for preservation and enhancement of existing
historical structures and new structures in historic districts.
   (e)   To act as liaison on behalf of the city to individuals and groups
concerned with historic preservation, and help property owners to make
judicious and historically correct decisions relating to proposed modifications
and/or repairs to historic structures.
   (f)   To provide available preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation
information to the citizens of Shelby.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.02  SHELBY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Shelby Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created and
shall consist of five members.  Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by City Council. A majority of the members shall be resident electors
of the city.
   (b)   Commission members shall each serve five-year staggered terms. In
order to stagger the terms, the first members of the Commission shall be
appointed as follows: one person to a term ending December 31, 2015; one person
to a term ending December 31, 2016; one person to a term ending December 31,
2017; one person to a term ending December 31, 2018; and one person to a term
ending December 31, 2019. Full terms shall commence on January 1.  Any vacancy
during the unexpired term of any appointed member shall be filled, within 60
days if possible, for the remainder of the term. Members shall serve without
compensation.
   (c)   All Commission members shall have a demonstrated special interest,
experience, or knowledge of historic preservation, history, architecture, or
related disciplines.  At least two members of the Commission shall be
preservation-related professionals in a field such as architecture,
architectural history, history, archeology, planning, or a related area, if
such are available in the city.  However, no more than two members shall be
employees of or policy-makers for any one non- governmental organization.
   (d)   Upon appointment, the Commission shall convene and select a chair,
vice chair, and secretary.  The Commission may establish its own rules and
regulations, subject to City Council approval.
   (e)   The Commission shall establish its schedule of meeting times and
places and shall meet at least once quarterly.
   (f)   The Commission shall comply with state and local laws dealing with
public meetings and shall provide adequate advance notice of meetings.  Written
and/or electronic minutes of Commission meetings shall be kept and made
available for public inspection.
   (g)   Commission members shall be subject to city ordinances regarding
conflict of interest and ethics as well as provisions on these subjects in the
Ohio Revised Code.
   (h)   No later than January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit a
written report to City Council that summarizes its activities, cases, special
projects, recommendations, and the qualifications of its members for the
previous year.  Such reports shall be available for public inspection.
   (i)   All Commission documents and materials shall be available for public
inspection in compliance with Ohio’s public records laws.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.03  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Shelby Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following
responsibilities:
   (a)   It shall promote interest in historic preservation and educate Shelby
citizens about historic preservation by holding workshops and preparing
informational material, as appropriate.
   (b)   The Commission shall recommend to City Council the designation of
landmarks and historic districts according to the procedures set forth for such
matters in §§
1488.07 and
1488.08.  It shall keep a list of designated landmarks and historic districts;
furnish the list to the Mayor, the Clerk of Council, and pertinent city
commissions; and make it available to the public.
   (c)   It shall issue certificates of appropriateness in response to
applications for construction, preservation, restoration, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, and/or demolition of any building, object or feature within any
historic district, or of any designated landmark, according to the procedures
set forth for such matters in §
1488.09.
   (d)   It shall use the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
(Appendix A) and apply them within the city as deemed appropriate by the
Commission.
   (e)   It shall work with property owners to designate eligible city
landmarks, buildings, or structures on the National Register and to participate
in the Ohio Historic Inventory (
Appendix B).
   (f)   It shall review all proposed National Register nominations for
properties within its jurisdiction.
   (g)   It shall advise other officials and departments in the city government
regarding the protection of local cultural resources.
   (h)   It shall act as a liaison on behalf of the local government to
individuals and organizations concerned with historic preservation.
   (i)   When the Commission considers a National Register nomination or other
action, which is normally evaluated by a professional in a specific discipline,
and that discipline is not represented on the Commission, the Commission may,
upon authorization of City Council, seek expertise in this area before
rendering its decision.  It may be advised by technical consultants, under
contract executed by the Mayor as Director of Public Service, as city finances
permit, to assist it in performing its functions.
   (j)   It shall encourage its members to attend workshops, seminars, and
other educational programs on historic preservation.
   (k)   It shall be responsible for maintaining a system for the survey and
inventory of historic properties and cultural resources.  All inventory
material shall be recorded according to Ohio Historic Preservation Office
guidelines, maintained securely, and made accessible to the public. The
inventory shall be updated periodically to reflect alterations and demolitions.
   (l)   Additional responsibilities may be undertaken by the Commission upon
mutual written agreement between the Ohio Historic Preservation Office and the
city.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.04  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Alteration.”  Any material change in the external architectural
features of any designated landmark.  Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any designated property
provided such work involves no change in material, design, texture or exterior
appearance; nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to prevent any
change, including the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition
of any feature which in the view of a duly authorized building official or Fire
Chief is required for the public safety because of an unsafe, insecure, or
dangerous condition.
   (b)   “Archeology.”  The scientific study of the material remains of past
human life and activities.
   (c)   “Certificate of appropriateness.”  A certificate issued by the Shelby
Historic Preservation Commission indicating that a proposed alteration or
demolition of a designated landmark or of a building or structure within a
historic district is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   “Cultural resources.”  The building, sites, objects, and districts
that embody or convey the city’s history.
   (e)   “Demolition.”  The removal or destruction in whole or in part of any
designated landmark, building, or structure, including those in historic
districts.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.05  STANDARDS FOR DESIGNATING A LANDMARK.
   (a)   A “designated landmark” is any real property that has been designated
as a historic landmark under the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   To qualify as a designated landmark, real property must have integrity
of design, material, and workmanship and have historic or cultural
significance.  Historically or culturally significant real property:
      (1)   Is associated with an event(s) that has (have) made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of history;
      (2)   Is associated with the life of a person(s) significant in the past;
      (3)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction; or which embodies the distinguishing characteristics of
an architectural style, or a work of a noted architect or builder; or
      (4)   Has yielded or is likely to yield information important to
prehistory or history.
   (c)   Cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historic figures, properties
owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that
have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic
buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that
have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered to
be of historic significance unless they are integral parts of districts that
meet the above criteria or unless they fall within the following categories:
      (1)   A religious property which is primarily significant for its
architecture or secular history;
      (2)   A relocated building which has a high degree of architectural
significance or which is the primary building or structure associated with an
individual or an event;
      (3)   The birthplace site or grave site of a historical figure if no
other built feature survives which is directly associated with his or her
productive life;
      (4)   A cemetery primarily important because of its age, distinctive
design features, association with the graves of persons of transcendent
importance, or which is associated with historic events;
      (5)   A reconstructed building or structure when accurately represented
in a suitable environment as part of a restoration master plan and when no
other building or structure with the same association has survived;
      (6)   A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition, or symbolic value have given it significance; or
      (7)   A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is
of exceptional importance or is unique in the city.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.06  STANDARDS FOR DESIGNATING A HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   (a)   A “historic district” is any area which has been designated a historic
district under the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to meeting at least one of the above criteria for historic
landmarks, proposed historic districts must also meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The proposed area must be defined by boundaries that set the area
off in relation to its surroundings;
      (2)   The area within the proposed boundaries must have a high degree of
historic integrity, without excessive loss of architectural or historic
character; and
      (3)   The area within the proposed boundaries must have an internal
historic cohesiveness in the sense of a shared common history of its
inhabitants, historical development according to a master plan, shared
architectural styles or designs, or a body of architecture illustrating the
evolution of architectural styles over a period of time.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.07  PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF INDIVIDUAL LANDMARKS.
   (a)   When a proposal to designate an individual property as a landmark is
received from a property owner or initiated by the Commission, the Commission
shall consider the proposal in terms of the criteria defined in §
1488.05 and make a recommendation to City Council.
   (b)   For proposed individual landmarks, the following procedure shall be
followed:
      (1)   The owner(s) shall be notified by personal service or certified
mail that the property is being considered for designation by the Commission. 
The notice shall include the date, time, and place of a public hearing relative
to the proposed designation.  The owner(s) shall be invited to comment in
writing.  The general public shall also be notified through the local
newspaper.
      (2)   No sooner than 30 days after sending its notice to the owners and
publishing a legal notice in the newspaper, the Commission shall conduct a
public hearing and review any written comments received.  The hearing shall be
open for public comment.  At the close of the hearing, and if there is no
objection by the property owner, the Commission shall forward a copy of the
minutes of the hearing, along with its recommendation for designation to City
Council.
      (3)   At the next regular City Council meeting occurring subsequent to
the receipt of a recommendation from the Historic Preservation Commission to
designate an individual landmark, Council shall vote by motion on the
designation of the property(ies).
      (4)   If Council does not approve the nomination(s), and if there is no
objection from the property owner, then the Commission may revise and/or
resubmit the nomination(s) to Council with any additional supportive
information.  The property owner shall be notified as to the date that City
Council will be acting on the renomination.
   (c)   Immediately after the approval of the individual landmark by City
Council, the Clerk of Council shall notify all affected property owner(s) of
the decision in writing, add the individual landmark designation to the list of
same, and forward a copy of the information to the Mayor and all pertinent city
commissions and personnel. The Clerk shall keep a copy of the list on file for
public inspection.
   (d)   The Commission may recommend that Council remove from the landmarks
list properties that no longer meet the criteria of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.08  PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (a)   When a proposal to create a historic district is received or initiated
by the Commission, the Commission shall consider the proposal in terms of the
criteria defined in §
1488.06 and make a recommendation to City Council.
   (b)   For proposed historic districts, the following procedures shall be
followed:
      (1)   All property owners within the proposed historic district shall be
notified by personal service or certified mail that the property is being
considered for designation within a historic district.  The notice shall
include the date, time, and place of a public hearing relative to the proposed
designation.  The owners shall be invited to comment in writing.  The general
public shall also be notified through the local newspaper.
      (2)   No sooner than 30 days after sending its notice to the owners and
publishing a legal notice in the newspaper, the Commission shall conduct a
public hearing and review any written comments received.  The hearing shall be
open for public comment.  The Commission shall explain the effects of
designation, why landmark status is being sought, and record the comments of
persons in attendance.  At the close of the hearing, and if there is no
objection by 51% or more of the property owners, the Commission shall forward a
copy of the minutes of the hearing, along with its recommendation for
designation to City Council.
      (3)   At the next regular City Council meeting occurring subsequent to
the receipt of a recommendation from the Historic Preservation Commission to
designate a historic district, Council shall vote by motion on the designation
of the district.
      (4)   If Council does not approve the nomination, and if owners pose no
objections, then the Commission may revise and/or resubmit the nomination to
Council with any additional supportive information.  The property owners shall
be notified as to the date that City Council will be acting on the designation
of the historic district.
   (c)   Immediately after the approval of the historic district by City
Council, the Clerk of Council shall notify all property owners in the district
of the decision in writing, add the historic district designation to the list
of same, and forward a copy of the information to the Mayor and all pertinent
city commissions and personnel.  The Clerk shall keep a copy of the list on
file for public inspection.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.09  PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PROPOSED ALTERATIONS TO HISTORIC LANDMARKS
AND PROPERTIES WITHIN HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The Commission, assisted by city personnel, shall be available to
applicants as a source of information and assistance before an application is
made.  Applicants are encouraged to make use of this service.
   (b)   No person shall make any exterior alteration to or demolish any
historic structure or part thereof which is a designated city landmark or lies
within a local historic district without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness.  A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained for new
construction on vacant sites within historic districts.
   (c)   Application(s) for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed at
City Hall in such form as may be prescribed by the Commission and approved by
the Mayor.  The Mayor or his/her designee is responsible for ensuring that any
construction to be undertaken is in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness.
   (d)   The Commission shall approve or reject an application for a
certificate of appropriateness within 45 days of the filing of a complete
application.  Said action shall be taken at a meeting in compliance with §
1488.02(f).  If the Commission fails to act within the time period, the
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed approved.
   (e)   Each case will require careful consideration of all relevant factors,
including earlier changes, existing conditions, and surrounding properties. 
Some flexibility is often necessary to accommodate the property owner.  The
Commission shall approve, or approve with conditions, the certificate of
appropriateness if it finds that the proposal conforms to the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, or locally adopted design standards.
   (f)   (1)   In the case of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness,
the Commission shall state the reasons for denial in writing and include
findings of fact in support of the decision. Copies of the decision shall be
mailed to the applicant.  The Commission may suggest changes which can result
in approval and offer to continue to meet with the owner to achieve a mutually
satisfactory compromise.
      (2)   The property owner may, within ten days of receipt of the decision
of the Historic Preservation Commission, appeal to City Council by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Commission and the Clerk of Council.  City
Council shall hear the appeal and render a decision within 30 days of the
filing of the notice of appeal.  City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify
the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission.  The property owner shall
receive written notification of Council’s decision.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 1488.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each violation.
Each and every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   The foregoing remedy is not exclusive and shall be in addition to any
other remedy, including civil action(s) in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
APPENDIX A
THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION
   The following Standards are to be applied to specific rehabilitation
projects in a reasonable manner, taking into consideration economic and
technical feasibility:
   (1)   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
   (2)   The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved.
The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that
characterize a property shall be avoided.
   (3)   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use.  Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken.
   (4)   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
   (5)   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be
preserved.
   (6)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced.
Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive
feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and
other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing
features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial
evidence.
   (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
   (8)   Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
   (9)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall
not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work
shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing,
size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of
the property and its environment.
   (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
APPENDIX B
THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES AND THE OHIO HISTORIC INVENTORY
DEFINED
   The National Register of Historic Places is the official list of properties
recognized by the federal government as worthy of preservation for their local,
state, or national significance in American history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
   The Ohio Historic Inventory is an accurate, continuing record of the
architectural and historic properties of the state.  The Ohio Historic
Inventory form records basic information on historic properties in Ohio.  The
form succinctly and accurately describes a building, site, structure or object
and its history.  By including a photo and a map, each form summarizes both
graphic and written information about a property.
(Ord. 20-2014, passed 2-17-2015)
TITLE EIGHT - HOUSING
      Chapter
         
1490.   EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
         
1492.   TRAILERS
CHAPTER 1490:  EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
1490.01   Title and application
   
1490.02   Purposes
   
1490.03   Definitions
   
1490.04   Findings
   
1490.05   Compliance; interpretation
   
1490.06   Conflicts of laws
   
1490.07   Exterior Property Maintenance Appeals Board
   
1490.08   Enforcement
   
1490.09   Maintenance responsibility
   
1490.10   General exterior maintenance requirements
   
1490.11   Exterior surfaces
   
1490.12   Foundations
   
1490.13   Roofs, gutters, downspouts and chimneys
   
1490.14   Yard area maintenance
   
1490.15   Abandoned structures and unoccupied lots
 
   
1490.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish, see
Ch. 1060
   Fences, see
Ch. 1462
   Filthy accumulations, see §
660.04
   Housing Advisory Committee, see
Ch. 286
   Proximity of stables, pens and coops to dwellings, see §
618.18
   Satellite dish antennas, see
Ch. 1484
   Signs, see §
1296.16,
Ch. 1480
   Swimming pools, see
Ch. 1482
§ 1490.01  TITLE AND APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall be known as the Exterior Property Maintenance Code of the
city. It is strictly limited to the establishment of minimum standards for the
maintenance of exterior surfaces and exterior functioning units of all
structures and buildings within the city, including yard areas immediately
contiguous thereto. No provisions of this chapter shall, in any way, directly
or indirectly, be interpreted to interfere with, or to limit the right of, any
owner or resident to inhabit real property owned or leased by him or her in
such manner and form as he or she may determine appropriate, consonant with
other applicable provisions of law. This chapter is directed to obvious visual
problems which may occasion incipient blighting conditions within the city. All
matters of the interior use, occupancy or habitation of any structure or
building within the city are specifically excluded from the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.02  PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance
and exterior conditions of all premises throughout the city; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners, residents and managers of premises,
including separate and correlative responsibilities and duties; to authorize
and establish procedures for the exterior inspection of the premises; to fix
penalties for violations of this chapter; and to provide for the repair,
demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the
public interest and it is intended that this chapter be construed and
interpreted to effectuate the purposes stated herein.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Abandoned." That to which an owner has relinquished all right, title,
claim and possession, with the intention of not reclaiming it or resuming its
ownership, possession or enjoyment.
   (b)   "Deterioration." The condition or appearance characterized by holes,
breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of
physical decay or neglect or lack of maintenance.
   (c)   "Mixed occupancy." Any building containing one or more dwelling units
or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling uses.
   (d)   "Nuisance."
      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence,
or as provided by the statutes of the state or ordinances of the city;
      (2)   Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist;
      (3)   Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of this chapter; and
      (4)   Fire hazards.
   (e)   "Owner."
      (1)   Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof, or has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as an owner or an agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, including but
not limited to the executor, the administrator, the trustee, the receiver or
the guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how
the possession was obtained.
      (2)   Any real estate company, firm, corporation, broker or salesman
having a listing agreement with the owner of real property for the purpose of
the sale of the same, and not having an additional contractual agreement, oral
or written, to manage or maintain the same during the continuance of the
listing agreement, is specifically exempted from this definition, and does not
fall within the purview of §
1490.09 establishing maintenance responsibility.
   (f)   "Premises." A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   (g)   "Refuse." All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, except body
waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.04  FINDINGS.
   It is hereby found and determined that there exist in the city various
structures, including yard areas immediately contiguous thereto, which are, or
may become in the future, deteriorated or defective with respect to exterior
maintenance.  It is further found and determined that certain conditions,
including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance of
the exterior of premises, lack of maintenance of a satisfactory appearance of
premises, and the existence of exterior fire hazards and unsanitary conditions,
constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety, welfare and reasonable
comfort of the residents and inhabitants of the city. It is further found and
determined that, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, the exterior appearance of certain properties has the further
effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating depressed neighborhood
groupings, and that if the same is not curtailed and corrected, the conditions
are likely to grow, spread and necessitate, in time, the expenditure of large
amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason
of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of the
blight may be prevented and the immediate neighborhood and property values
thereby maintained.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.05  COMPLIANCE; INTERPRETATION.
   A residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building, and the land on
which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial,
business or industrial occupancy, shall be in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, whether or not the building shall have been constructed, altered
or repaired before or after the enactment of this chapter, and without regard
to any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the
building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities, prior
to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum
standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such
structures and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for
the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building. Where there is a
mixed occupancy, residential or nonresidential use therein, the same shall be
nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.06  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   In any case where a provision of this chapter imposes a higher standard than
that set forth in any other ordinance of the city or law of the state, the
standard set forth herein shall prevail, but if a provision of this chapter
imposes a lower standard than that imposed by any other ordinance of the city
or law of the state, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance or law shall prevail.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.07  EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE APPEALS BOARD.
   To implement the purposes and requirements of this chapter, there is hereby
created the Exterior Property Maintenance Appeals Board, hereinafter referred
to as the Board. The Board shall consist of three members:  the Director of
Finance and Public Record and two persons to be appointed by the Mayor. The
appointed members shall have sufficient legal and/or technical training and
background to enable them to hear appeals of alleged violations of this chapter
and shall serve terms of three years. The Board shall organize and adopt rules
for its own government, consistent with law or with any other ordinance of the
city. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson may administer
oaths and the Board may compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public, and the Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1490.08  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The Mayor and/or his or her designee shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter as set forth herein.
      (1)   Inspection. All buildings and premises within the city are subject
to exterior inspections from time to time by the Mayor and/or his or her
designee.
      (2)   Notice of violation.
         A.   Where a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to
exist, the Mayor and/or his or her designee shall cause a written notice of the
violation to be served upon the person responsible for the correction thereof.
The notice shall specify the violation committed and shall provide for a
reasonable period of time, not more than 60 days, to correct or abate the
violation. In the event that weather is a major consideration in correcting or
abating a violation, the Mayor and/or his or her designee may extend the time
set out herein to not more than 60 days immediately following the occurrence of
appropriate weather conditions.
         B.   Notice may be served personally or by certified mail addressed to
the last known address of the person to be served, or by leaving a copy thereof
at the usual residence of the person to be served. If the last known address
cannot be ascertained, the notice shall be posted on the outside front entrance
of the structure in alleged violation.
         C.   In the absence of an appeal, as provided below, completion of
notice and failure to comply shall constitute a final order as to these
administrative proceedings.
      (3)   Appeal.
         A.   Within ten days of the date of service of the notice of
violation, any person affected by the notice may request a hearing thereon
before the Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written request with the
Chairperson of the Board. The Chairperson of the Board, upon receipt of the
request, shall, within 30 days therefrom, and upon five days' notice to the
party and the Mayor and/or his or her designee, set the matter down for
hearing. The Board may sustain, modify or dismiss, in whole or in part, any
action required to correct or abate the violation set forth in the notice and
shall issue an order incorporating its determinations, and the order shall be a
final order as to these administrative proceedings; provided, however, that any
order of modification or dismissal shall be effective for two years following
the date of issuance of the order, and thereafter the subject of the order of
modification or dismissal may be amendable to further inspection, notice and
appeal as set forth herein.
         B.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider only the following in
determining appropriate action to be taken:
            1.   Any modification of the original order of the Mayor and/or his
or her designee shall not, in any material way alter the standards of this
chapter and shall not affect detrimentally the health or safety of occupants or
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or owners of adjacent premises
or of the immediate neighborhood; and
            2.   Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, manager or resident by reason of compelling an
expenditure for repair of the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to health, safety or welfare of the community
that might be derived therefrom.
   (b)   No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this
chapter shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other local
ordinance applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, manager or resident from complying with any such
provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any such other
provision.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.09  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   The owner and manager of every single or multiple-unit structure
within the city shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior surfaces of
the same in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The owner and manager of every multiple-unit structure within the city
shall be responsible for maintaining the yard area contiguous thereto in
conformity with the provisions of §
1490.14.
   (c)   The owner, manager and any adult resident of a single-dwelling
structure within the city shall be responsible for maintaining the yard area
immediately contiguous thereto to conformity with the provisions of §
1490.14.
   (d)   Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the
respective obligations and responsibilities imposed herein upon the owner and
manager, as differentiated from those of the residents, shall not be altered or
affected by an agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid, or
between them and other parties.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.10  GENERAL EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The exterior surfaces of all structures within the city, be the same
functional or aesthetic, shall be maintained in good repair. Any exterior part
or feature thereof having functional use shall be capable of performing the use
for which the part or feature was designed.
   (b)   The entire yard area contiguous to all structures within the city,
extending up to and including the lot line in all directions, shall be
maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.11  EXTERIOR SURFACES.
   (a)   All exterior surfaces of every structure within the city shall be
maintained so as to resist decay or deterioration from any naturally occurring
cause. All exterior surfaces shall be covered with paint, finish or other
surface coating so as to prevent the decay or deterioration. An exterior wall
segment, facing or other distinguishable surface area determined by the Mayor
and/or his or her designee to have more than 25% of its total area bare,
peeling, flaking, pitted, corroded or otherwise deteriorated shall be surface-
coated in its entirety. If the surface to be coated is a portion of a larger
structure, each surface coating shall be compatible in color, texture and
design with the entire structure. If the entire exterior surface of a structure
is to be surface-coated, the surface coating shall be compatible in color,
texture and design with similar structures in the immediate neighborhood.
   (b)   All deteriorated or decayed exterior walls, doors, porches, floors,
steps, railings or parts of feature thereof shall be repaired or replaced.
   (c)   All damaged or broken windows, and deteriorated or decayed sills,
sashes, moldings, lintels, frames or trim thereof, shall be repaired or
replaced.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.12  FOUNDATIONS.
   (a)   The foundation of every structure within the city shall be maintained
in such condition and repair as to prevent damage to the structural integrity
of the same.
   (b)   The foundation exterior of every structure within the city shall be
free of damaged, loose or missing blocks, bricks, tile or other foundation
material. All loose, missing or deteriorated mortar shall be repaired or
replaced.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.13  ROOFS, GUTTERS, DOWNSPOUTS AND CHIMNEYS.
   (a)   The roof of every structure within the city shall be maintained
weather-tight. All missing shingles, or other roofing materials, shall be
replaced with materials of a kind, nature, design and color that are similar to
the original thereof. Any roof, or distinguishable portion thereof, determined
by the Mayor and/or his or her designee to have more than 25% of its total area
compromised of missing or deteriorated shingles, or other roofing materials,
shall be replaced in its entirety.
   (b)   Any structure within the city having gutters and/or downspouts in
place shall be maintained in such manner a to keep the gutters and/or
downspouts free of exterior rust and corrosion. Such rust and corrosion as may
develop in the course of ordinary use of the same shall be removed, painted or
otherwise surface-coated so as to keep the gutters and/or downspouts free of
visible rust or corrosion.
   (c)   The chimney of every structure within the city shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair, free of loose, missing or deteriorated
mortar, bricks or other chimney building materials. Any such loose, missing or
deteriorated mortar, bricks or other chimney building materials shall be
refitted, replaced or repaired.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.14  YARD AREA MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Refuse.
      (1)   No furniture, mattresses, household furnishings, rugs, appliances,
dilapidated automobiles or automobile parts shall be placed or stored in any
yard area contiguous to any structure within the city over a period in excess
of 24 hours; provided, however, that those of the items are set forth herein
which are usually and ordinarily placed for refuse hauling may be so placed for
a period of time not to exceed the next regularly scheduled refuse hauling
date.
      (2)   Exterior property areas of all premises shall be kept free of
debris, objects, materials or conditions that, in the opinion of the Mayor and/
or his or her designee, create a health, accident or fire hazard, are a public
nuisance or constitute a blighting or deteriorating influence on the
neighborhood. Broken glass, stumps, filth, garbage, trash and debris shall not
be permitted on any property.
   (b)   Vegetation.
      (1)   All trees, shrubs or plants shall be trimmed in conformity with
Chapter 1026, and dead, decayed or broken portions thereof shall be removed.
      (2)   Grass and weeds shall be maintained, controlled and cut in
conformity with
Chapter 662.
   (c)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   All structures located in the yard area contiguous to any
residential and commercial structure within the city, such as sheds, barns,
garages, bins and the like, shall be maintained in good repair in conformity
with other provisions of this chapter having regard to foundations, roofs and
exterior surfaces.
      (2)   Any broken, deteriorated or decayed fence, yard enclosure or other
device or structure located in the yard area contiguous or any residential or
commercial structure within the city shall be repaired or removed.
   (d)   Automobile parking.
      (1)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked in any part of the yard
area contiguous to a residential or commercial structure within the city, other
than that area designated by custom and use as the driveway or parking lot, for
a cumulative amount of time greater than six hours in any 48-hour period.
      (2)   Other than as provided in division (d)(1) hereof, the parking and
storage of all motor vehicles, trailers and other equipment shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the traffic code as set forth in Part Four of
these Codified Ordinances and the Ohio Revised Code.
   (e)   Ground surface hazards. Holes, cracks excavations, breaks, projections
and obstructions at any place on the premises which, in the opinion of the
Mayor and/or his or her designee, are a hazard using the premises, shall not be
permitted.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.15  ABANDONED STRUCTURES AND UNOCCUPIED LOTS.
   (a)   If any structure shall become abandoned, the structure shall be
presumed to be a nuisance affecting or endangering surrounding property values
and to be detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
property or general welfare of the community, and the same shall be abated.
   (b)   Whenever the Mayor and/or his or her designee shall find any structure
to be abandoned within the meaning of this section, he or she shall give notice
in the same manner as service of a summons in civil action, or by certified
mail addressed to the owner of record of the premises at his or her last known
address or to the address to which tax bills are sent, or by a combination of
the foregoing methods, to abate the abandoned condition within 30 days, by
placing the structure in operation in accordance with this section, adapting
and using the structure for another use, or razing the structure, removing all
debris, any signs, goods, supplies and equipment, and filling depressions to
the grade level of the lot; provided, however, that if the structure is in use
at the time that notice is given and remains in operation for 90 consecutive
days, the provisions of this section shall not apply.
   (c)   Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner to comply with the
notice to abate an abandoned structure, the Mayor and/or his or her designee
shall advise the Director of Law of all the facts and the Director of Law shall
proceed to exercise on behalf of the city any remedy which shall then be
available to it to secure the abatement, including any remedy that pertains to
the abatement of a public nuisance, and to recover any damages or enforce any
penalties which may be recovered or imposed by the city.
   (d)   In the case of unoccupied or inoperative structures, whether or not
abandoned, the lot upon which any such structure is located, with any other
unoccupied lot, shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any such lot shall be provided with grass or other appropriate ground
cover or landscaping material so as to assure absorption of rainfall and
prevent erosion and rapid run-off of surface water. The owner shall cut and
maintain all grass or other ground cover and remove all rubbish and weeds from
the premises. The parking of motor vehicles upon the premises shall be
prohibited and the Mayor and/or his or her designee may order the owner of the
premises to install fencing approved by the Mayor and/or his or her designee,
which fencing will be sufficient to block motor vehicle access to the property.
(Ord. 23-89, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 26-2008, passed 8-4-2008)
§ 1490.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever a person charged herein with the maintenance of a structure
or premises fails to comply with any final order as provided in this chapter,
the Director of Law shall institute an appropriate action at law.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to
comply with any final order as provided herein, is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to
comply with any final order as provided herein, on more than one subject matter
in any two-year period, separate and distinct from a conviction upon a prior
subject matter or any continued daily violation of such prior subject matter,
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more
than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A
separate offense on such subsequent subject matter within two years shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1492:  TRAILERS
Section
   
1492.01   Trailer defined
   
1492.02   Parking on streets
   
1492.03   Use as residence or business
   
1492.04   Inspections; fee
 
   
1492.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Manufactured homes in flood hazard areas, see §
1466.24
   MHP Manufactured Home Park District, see §
1266.03,
Ch. 1286
   Occupying manufactured homes while in motion, see §
440.08
Statutory reference:
   Licensing and fees by Board of Health, see R.C. §§ 3733.03 et seq.
   State license plate fee, see R.C. § 4503.04(C)
   Tax levy on house trailers, see R.C. §§ 4503.06 et seq.
§ 1492.01  TRAILER DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, "trailer" means a house car, camp car or any other
vehicle or structure mounted on wheels or capable of being moved from place to
place, either by its own power or by any other outside motivating source, and
any mobile home, whether mounted on wheels or placed upon a base or slab, and
being used or capable of being used for living or sleeping purposes.
(Ord. 20-82, passed 8-2-1982)
§ 1492.02  PARKING ON STREETS.
   No person shall park any trailer at any one time within any 24-hour period
in or upon any street or highway within the city for a longer period than three
hours nor for any period of time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and
6:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 2-43, passed 1-18-1943)
§ 1492.03  USE AS RESIDENCE OR BUSINESS.
   (a)   A site permit from the city and approval from Richland County Division
of Building Regulations, if applicable, shall be obtained for each trailer.
   (b)   Electric, gas, water and sewer and/or any other public utility or
service connection shall be made directly to the trailer in the same manner as
provided for other buildings.
   (c)   Trailers shall be placed on a slab, foundation or basement.  Slab
construction standards shall be the same as those required for street
construction.  An apron shall enclose the underpart of the trailer.
   (d)   Property setback lines shall conform to present requirements. 
However, if deed restrictions are greater, those restrictions shall take
precedence.
(Ord. 61-2000, passed 12-4-2000)
§ 1492.04  INSPECTIONS; FEE.
   (a)   The Division of Health or its designated agent shall inspect all
mobile homes initially when they are installed in the city and also when they
are moved to determine that all connections and disconnections have been
properly made to the sanitary sewerage system.
   (b)   An inspection fee of $15 shall be charged and payable to the Director
of Finance and Public Record for each such inspection.
§ 1492.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(1986 Code, § 1373.99)
PART SIXTEEN:  FIRE PREVENTION
      Chapter
         
1610.   OHIO FIRE CODE
CHAPTER 1610:  OHIO FIRE CODE
Section
   
1610.01   1998 edition adopted
   
1610.02   Purpose
   
1610.03   Application of Code
   
1610.04   Enforcement; responsibilities of Municipal Fire Safety Inspector
   
1610.05   Compliance required
   
1610.06   Posting arson laws
   
1610.07   Setting fires which spread
   
1610.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires
   
1610.09   Inspections
   
1610.10   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment
   
1610.11   File and distribution copies
   
1610.12   Conflicts of laws
   
1610.13   Permit fees
 
   
1610.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §§
642.06,
642.07
   Driving over fire hose, see §
432.28
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 240
   Fire hydrants, see §§
452.03,
642.14,
1040.05
   Fireworks, see §
678.10
   Open burning, see §
660.08
   Parking or stopping in fire lanes, see §
452.16
   Underground storage tanks, see §
240.05
   Water service for fire protection, see §§
1040.04,
1040.05
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes, see R.C. § 731.231
   Fireworks, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   Gasoline, oils and paint, see R.C. Ch. 3741
   Power to regulate against fires, see R.C. §§ 737.27, 3737.08
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes, see R.C. § 715.26
   Right to examine buildings, see R.C. § 3737.14
   State Fire Marshal, see R.C. Ch. 3737
§ 1610.01  1998 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by the municipality the
1998 edition of the Ohio Fire Code (OFC), or any successor fire code enacted
after the 1998 edition, as adopted by the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division
of State Fire Marshal, published in Division 1301:7 of the Ohio Administrative
Code (O.A.C.).
§ 1610.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is to prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
§ 1610.03  APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, applies to the use of all lands and properties within the municipality
and such other lands or properties owned by the municipality which are situated
outside the corporate limits thereof.
§ 1610.04  ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF MUNICIPAL FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (a)   No person shall serve as a Municipal Fire Safety Inspector unless he
or she has received a certificate issued by the Ohio Superintendent of Public
Instruction under R.C. § 3303.07 evidencing his or her satisfactory completion
of a fire safety inspection training program.
(R.C. § 3737.34)
   (b)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or inspection,
shall issue citations when he or she finds conditions as specified in R.C. §
3737.41 which are especially dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings,
premises or property, and shall make any necessary remedial orders in
connection therewith. Citation enforcement may be by use of the procedures
established by R.C. § 3737.42 for hearing on the citation or R.C. § 3737.44 for
injunctive relief or a temporary restraining order and oral order for vacation
of the building or premises.
   (c)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after
inspection or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a
citation to the responsible person for a violation of the Ohio Fire Code or any
order issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal or any Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
The citation shall fix a reasonable time for abatement of the violation. Each
citation issued under this division shall be prominently posted by the
responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or near each place
a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (d)   Upon request of the Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, the Municipal
Attorney shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to
enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3737.
§ 1610.05  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code,
as adopted in §
1610.01, or any order issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. § 3737.51(A))
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities prescribed in the Ohio Fire Code or fail to comply
with the municipal application and plan submission and processing requirements,
including payment of the fees designated therefor.
§ 1610.06  POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in the building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon the
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section. 
(R.C. § 3737.61)
§ 1610.07  SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any fire which,
through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to any
structure, field or wood lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62)
§ 1610.08  RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (a)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or upon
receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises, shall
immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or otherwise
notify the Fire Department concerning the fire and shall spread an alarm
immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, "unfriendly fire" means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (c)   No person shall fail to comply with this section. 
(R.C. § 3737.63)
§ 1610.09  INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless, prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making the inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency and that he or she is not acting in an official
capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency. 
(R.C. § 3737.64)
§ 1610.10  SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
fire-fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or fire-
fighting equipment without a certificate or a provisional certificate issued by
the Ohio Fire Marshal. 
(R.C. § 3737.65(A), (B))
§ 1610.11  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, are on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.
Copies are also on file in the County Law Library. In addition, the Clerk of
Council has copies available for distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1610.12  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   The Ohio Building Code shall supersede and govern any order, standard,
rule or regulation of the Ohio Fire Code or the Division of State Fire Marshal,
Department of Commerce, in all cases where any such order, standard, rule or
regulation is in conflict with the Ohio Building Code, except that rules
adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3743
prevail in the event of a conflict.
   (b)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the stricter
standard shall control.
§ 1610.13  PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for all permits issued by the Fire Chief or the Municipal Fire
Safety Inspector pursuant to § 1301:7-1-04 (FM-103.0) shall be $75 unless
specifically indicated otherwise in the Ohio Fire Code.
§ 1610.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates §
1610.05(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates §
1610.05(b) or
1610.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates §
1610.07 or §
1610.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
      (4)   Whoever violates §
1610.08 or §
1610.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a serious violation of
the Ohio Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it shall be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation.
      (2)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation.
      (3)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day during which the
failure or violation continues.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
by §
1610.04(c) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each
violation.
      (5)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this chapter.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (7)   Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk of Council for deposit into the General Fund. These penalties may be
recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in the
Court of Common Pleas.
(R.C. § 3737.51(B) to (H))
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES
         
II.   EASEMENTS
         
III.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
         
IV.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
         
V.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
         
VI.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
         
VII.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
         
VIII.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
         
IX.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I:  FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
                                          Municipal water works plant and system franchise,
318                             Uncertain to be operative in the event of foreclosure of
                                          mortgage to secure bond issue.
                                          Municipal light and power plant franchise, to be
331                             Uncertain operative in the event of foreclosure of mortgage
                                          to secure bond issue.
8                               Uncertain Amending the Shelby Water Co. Franchise (old Ord.
                                          263-1917).
(Ord. Book 3, p. 205; Rev. Ord.           To the Citizens Electric Railway, Light and Power
Appendix, p. 105)               Uncertain Co. of Mansfield, the right to construct, maintain
                                          and operate an electric street railway. 
(Res.;  Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 4-19-1899 Telephone Franchise; grant to G.M. Skiles.
110)
(Rev. Ord.  Appendix, p. 116)  12-10-    Logan Natural Gas and Fuel Company Franchise.
                                1912
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 117)    6-18-1917 Shelby Water Company Franchise.
20                              5-28-1923 Amending the Shelby Water Co. Franchise (old Ord.
                                          263-1917).
21                              5-28-1923 Amending the Shelby Water Co. Franchise (old Ord.
                                          263-1917).
                                          To the Norwalk & Shelby Rwy. Co., the right to
22                              6-18-1923 maintain tracks and operate interurban cars on
                                          certain streets.
                                          To the Shelby Telephone Co., the right to
140                             6-6-1927  construct, lay, use and maintain underground
                                          conduits in the streets, and the like.
195                             4-5-1929  To Ohio Public Service Co., the right to construct
                                          and operate an electric railroad for 20 years.
317                             11-20-    Purchase of waterworks plant and system and
                                1933      waterworks franchise by city.
21-48                           5-6-1948  Light plant franchise to be operative by purchaser
                                          of mortgage revenue bonds in event of foreclosure.
19-49                           5-17-1949 To C.W. Boyce and S.V. Bol, dba. Shelby Coach Co.,
                                          to operate motor buses over certain streets.
31-56                           9-4-1956  Fixing the price of gas charged by the Ohio Fuel
                                          Gas Co. for 3 years.
3-60                            2-15-1960 Fixing the price of gas charged by the Ohio Fuel
                                          Gas Co. for 4 years.
8-64                            5-18-1964 Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio, Inc., for 4 years.
10-67                           6-5-1967  To Direct Channels of Shelby, Inc., for a CATV
                                          system for 10 years.
18-68                           8-5-1968  Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio, Inc., for 4 years.
                                          Consenting to transfer of franchise from Direct
Res. 53-70                      12-7-1970 Channels of Shelby, Ohio, Inc., to Multi-Channel
                                          TV Cable Co. of Mansfield.
36-72                           9-5-1972  Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio, Inc., for 4 years.
7-74                            3-18-1974 Amends Ord. 10-67, CATV franchise.
40-76                           9-22-1976 Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio, Inc., for 2 years. Repeals Ord. 36-72
16-77                           5-19-1977 To Multi-Channel TV Cable Co., for a CATV system
                                          for 15 years.
23-79                           3-19-1979 Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio, Inc., for 2 years. Repeals Ord. 40-76.
24-81                           6-29-1981 Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                          Ohio Inc., for 2 years.
32-83                           10-10-    Fixing the price of gas charged by Columbia Gas of
                                1983      Ohio, Inc.
21-92                           10-5-1992 Granting a permit to Multi-Channel TV Cable Co. to
                                          do business as a cable company.
                                          Approving transfer of CATV franchise from Multi-
30-97                           8-18-1997 Channel TV Cable Co., dba Adelphia Cable
                                          Communications, to CVI.
Res. 54-2002                    9-16-2002 Approving the assignment of the cable television
                                          franchise to Time Warner Cable, Inc.
 
(1996 Code, TSO A)
TABLE II:  EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
22-  5-18-1953 Purchase of an easement from N.J. and G.M. Briner in Cass Twp.
53
Res.
32-  6-18-1956 Granting an easement for a sanitary sewer in Inlot 1706.
56
Res. 10-15-    Authorizes easement with the B.&O. R.R. Co. for the Whitney Ave. trunkline
52-  1956      sewer.
56
Res.           Authorizes easement with the B.&O. R.R. Co. for the Dowds School sanitary
53-  Uncertain sewer.
56
Res.           Authorizes an easement to R.C. and T. Seyforth for a private sanitary
14-  3-4-1957  sewer.
57
Res.
18-  4-1-1957  Releasing an easement from the United Brethren Church for a water pipe.
57
Res.           Authorizes contract with the Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis
10-  2-11-1960 R.R. Co. for a right-of-way and easement for the main intercepting sewer
60             system of the city.
Res.           Authorizes contract with the B.&O. R.R. Co. for an easement for a water
16-  4-4-1960  line.
60
12-  5-16-1960 To Shelam Corp. for a 24-in. storm drainage tile on Martin Dr.
60
25-  8-15-1960 Authorizes the purchase of an easement over part of Outlot 55 for a utility
60             right-of-way.
27-  9-6-1960  Authorizes the purchase of an easement for a water line from the N.Y.C.
60             R.R. Co.
28-  9-19-1960 Authorizes the purchase of right-of-way easement for a water line from
60             Flint to Third Sts.
8-61 2-20-1961 For private gas line across the south end of the Hitching Grounds parking
               lot.
10-  3-6-1961  The most westerly 20 feet from north to south of the Hitching Grounds
61             parking lot.
45-  11-6-1961 Easement for right-of-way under alley to the rear of the First National
61             Bank Building.
Res.           Granting easements to the state for improvement of S.R. 39, Sec. 3.86
12-  3-5-1963  (Structure No. 0388).
63
26-  9-9-1963  Appropriation of easement from J. and M. Fagan for Martin Dr. storm sewer
63             improvement project.
10-  3-18-1968 Accepting easements from the United States for water, sewer, drainage and
68             electrical lines servicing The Central Ohio Industrial Park.
Res.           Authorizes agreement with L.D. Post for an easement for the Raymond Ave.
46-  8-19-1968 storm sewer project.
68
Res.
26-  5-19-1969 Granting an easement to L.B. DeLong for a warehouse over a sanitary sewer.
69
Res.
27-  7-19-1971 Authorizes easement with B.&O. R.R. Co. for a storm sewer.
71
Res.           Authorizes easement with Penn Central Transportation Co. for a sanitary
29-  7-19-1971 sewer main.
71
21-  8-16-1971 Authorizes easement to Moody and Thomas Milling Co. on the west side of
71             Broadway between Inlots 59 and 536.
22-  9-7-1971  To the Standard Tube Co. for a 10-foot water line along Mohican St.
71
8-72 2-22-1972 Accepting an easement for construction, and the like, of the Carton Service
               Storm Sewer.
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from National Church Residences of Shelby
66-  7-19-1976 for construction of a water main.
76
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from Pioneer Joint Vocational School
79-  9-7-1976  Board of Education for construction of a utility line.
76
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from D.L. and G.L. Fraley for water line
83-  10-4-1976 purposes.
76
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easements from National Church Residences for
89-  10-3-1977 electric and water lines and sanitary sewer.
77
Res.           Granting an easement to Sam Roush for reconstruction of warehouse on Wall
96-  11-7-1977 St.
77
Res. 11-20-    Authorizes rental and lease agreement with Charles Briner for roadway
112- 1978      easement.
78
Res. 1-15-1979 Authorizes purchase of easement from Conrail Corp. for water line.
6-79
Res. 1-21-1980 Authorizes acceptance of easement from National Church Residences for water
4-80           line and sanitary sewer.
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easements from Gamble's Mill Development Co. for
25-  4-7-1980  storm sewer.
80
Res.
26-  4-7-1980  Authorizes acceptance of easement from W.R. Morris, et al., for water line.
80
Res.
38-  5-19-1980 Authorizes an easement for power line on Hoover property.
80
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from Shelby Mutual Insurance Co. and
74-  9-15-1980 Church of the Nazarene for sanitary sewer.
80
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from C.T. and L.J. Browning for sanitary
79-  10-6-1980 sewer.
80
Res.           Authorizes acceptance of easement from R.D. and J.G. Grove for sanitary
80-  10-6-1980 sewer.
80
5-81 1-26-1981 Appropriates certain easements in the Consolidated Rail  Corp. real estate
               for constructing sanitary sewer lines.
Res.           Authorizes an easement to Cherie A. Blackman adjacent to the Administration
34-  6-1-1981  Building.
81
Res.           Authorizes granting an easement to Columbia Gas of Ohio to construct,
35-  6-1-1981  maintain and operate a pipeline on Lot 805.
81
Res.           Accepts a sanitary sewer easement from Charles and Juanita Russell and
50-  8-17-1981 Vernon and Arlene Burks.
81
Res.           Accepts sanitary sewer easement from the National Church Residences,
11-  3-1-1982  Catherine Thabet and Edwin and Corrine Payne.
82
Res.           Accepts an electric and ingress-egress easement and a sanitary sewer
28-  6-21-1982 ingress-egress easement from Donald  Graber.
82
Res.           Authorizes the granting of an easement to the Shelby Hospital Association
50-  10-4-1982 for construction and maintenance of a sidewalk.
82
Res.           Authorizes the granting of an easement for highway purposes to the Ohio
51-  10-4-1982 Department of Transportation.
82
30-  12-5-1994 Appropriates easement for the public purpose of improvement of High School
94             Ave. with a sanitary sewer.
Res.           Authorizes extinguishment of a 15-foot utility easement along the south
32-  5-20-1996 side of Lot 3997 of Fox Run Subdivision No. 5.
96
Res.           Releases utility easement in north-south alley between Inlots 100 and 101;
62-  11-4-1996 in east-west alley between Inlots 101 and 102 and Outlot 48; and east-west
96             alley between Inlot 100 and Outlot 48.
Res.
63-  11-4-1996 Releases utility easement located 15 feet along the south side of Lot 3997.
96
Res.           Authorizes easement agreement with Ashland Railway, Inc., for extension of
32-  4-17-2000 138 KV transmission line from near George Hawk Rd. to State St.
2000
Res.           Authorizes easement agreement with Stoney and Doris Mullins for
66-  9-5-2000  rehabilitation of Reservoir No. 2.
2000
Res.           Authorizes easement agreement with Forrest F. and Bonnie Strohm for removal
76-  10-2-2000 of elevated water storage facility on Lot 2725 (Mohican St.).
2000
Res.           Authorizes easement agreement with Lee and Patricia Faulkner for
77-  10-2-2000 construction and maintenance of a storm drain line.
2000
Res.           Authorizes easement agreement with Donald and Jean Lash, Jerome and Rita
6-   2-3-2003  Eldridge, Sue A. Clingan, Kenneth Hammond, Dennis and Terri Hummel, Loyal
2003           Order of Moose, and C&T Laundromat for clearance of a water course.
Res.           Authorizes storm sewer easement agreement with the developers of Gambles
10-  2-18-2003 Mill #5.
2003
Res.
2-   1-5-2004  Authorizes easements for the Heatherwood sanitary sewer and water lines.
2004
Res.           Authorizes easement for utility services in the vacated portion of North
17-  4-5-2004  Third Street.
2004
Res.           Authorizes easement for utility services in the vicinity of the Tucker
18-  4-5-2004  Avenue Bridge.
2004
Res.           Authorizes easement for the purpose of installation of sanitary sewers and
44-  7-6-2004  waterline utilities.
2004
Res.
53-  9-7-2004  Authorizes easement for extension of a service line to CSX Transportation.
2004
Res.
59-  10-4-2004 Authorizes easement for the Forest Street water line.
2004
Res. 11-21-    Authorizes acquisition of rights of easement for extension of the second 
55-  2005      138kV line from the Howard Substation to the CSX Railroad right-of-way.
2005
Res. 10-16-    Authorizes acquisition of rights of easement for extension of water and
48-  2006      sewer lines on Mansfield Avenue/State Route 39.
2006
 
(1996 Code, TSO B)
TABLE III:  VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
                                            Alley from the east bank of the
                                            Blackfork Creek along the north
(Ord. Book  1884-1898, p. 66)   10-5-1887  boundary line of Inlots 244, 243,
                                            242, 241 and 240 to the west
                                            boundary line of Lot (2), Outlot
                                            24.
                                            Alley between Inlots 302 and 303
(Ord. Book  1884-1898,  p. 106)9-13-1890  located on the north side of
                                            Raymond Ave.
                                            Alley between Lots 253 and 254
(Ord. Book 1884-1898,  p. 122)  7-27-1892  located on the east side of N.
                                            Broadway.
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)    7-21-1897  Alley between Inlot 199 and Inlots
                                            183, 186, 187, 190 and 191.
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)    7-21-1897  Alley between Lots 186 and 187
                                            located on Walnut St.
                                            Alley between Lots 190 and 191
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)    7-21-1897  located on the west side of Walnut
                                            St.
                                            Alley between Lots 346 and 347
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 270)    8-18-1897  located on the north side of
                                            Raymond Ave.
                                            Alley between Lots 174 and 175
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 271)    8-18-1897  located on the east side of Second
                                            St.
                                            Alley between Inlots 354 and 355
(page 3)                         8-17-1898  located on the north side of W.
                                            Main St., west of West St.
                                            Alley on the east ends of Lots 554
(page 3)                         7-20-1898  through 562 located on the east
                                            side of Central Ave.
                                            Alley between Inlots 554 and 553
(page 3)                         7-20-1898  located on the east side of the
                                            south end of Central Ave.
                                            Alley in the rear of Lots 1127
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 189)    8-1-1900   through 1150 located on the south
                                            side of Grand Blvd.
                                            Alley between Inlots 216 and 217
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 490)    9-7-1904   from South St. to the rear of such
                                            lots.
                                            Alley between Inlots 1183 and 1184
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 415)    6-27-1906  located on the west side of Gamble
                                            St. south of Grace Ave.
                                            Alley west of Inlots 1510, 1511
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 523)    7-28-1908  and 1504 between the south line of
                                            Monroe and the north line of
                                            Franklin Ave.
                                            Alley between the west line of Lot
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 524)    4-6-1910   1528 and the east line of the
                                            B.&O. R.R., west of Hamilton Ave.
                                            Alley between the right-of-way on
                                            the west side of the Big Four R.R.
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 547)    8-16-1910  to the southwest corner of Lot 289
                                            located north of W. Main St. at
                                            Main and the Big Four Crossing.
                                            Alley between the right-of-way
(Ord. Book 1898-1912,  p. 570)  6-23-1911  east of the B.&O. R.R. and the
                                            west line of Lot 1531 located west
                                            of Hamilton Ave.
                                            Alley between Inlots 320 and 219,
                                            and the alley which runs along the
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 148;               north side of such lots from the
Rev. Ord., p. 126)               11-19-1913 right-of-way of the Cleveland,
                                            Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis
                                            Rwy. Co., west, to the west side
                                            of Inlot 321.
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)    11-6-1916  Alley between Inlots 236 and 1432
                                            on the east side of Third St.
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)    11-6-1916  Alley between Inlots 1190 and 1191
                                            on the east side of S. Gamble St.
                                            Alley between Inlots 1467, 1468,
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)    11-6-1916  1469 and 1481 on the west side of
                                            Jennings Ct.
(Ord. Book 1, p. 167; Rev. Ord.,            Alley between Inlots 113, 114,
p. 126)                          Uncertain  115, 116 and Subdivision 10 of
                                            Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19.
                                            Alley from Blackfork St. to the
(Ord. Book 2, p. 67; Rev. Ord.,  Uncertain  west line of Outlot 2 and
p. 126)                                     extending along the north line of
                                            Inlots 244, 243, 242, 241 and 240.
(Ord. Book 2, p. 160; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  Alley between Inlots 302 and 303.
p. 126)
                                            Part of Clark Ave.; an alley south
(Ord. Book 2, p. 224; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  of Clark Ave.; and a street
p. 127)                                     connecting Clark Ave. and another
                                            alley.
                                            Alleys lying between Inlots 199
                                            and Lots 183, 186, 187, 190 and
                                            191, running north and south
(Ord. Book 2, p. 269; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  between such lots; also the alley
p. 126)                                     running east and west between Lots
                                            186 and 187; also the alley
                                            running east and west between Lots
                                            190 and 191.
(Ord. Book 2, p. 270; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  Alley between Inlots 346 and 347.
p. 126)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 271; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  Alley between Inlots 174 and 175.
p. 126)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 524; Rev. Ord.,            Alley between the west line of Lot
p. 127)                          Uncertain  1528 in the Jenner Addition and
                                            the B.&O. R.R. Co.'s right-of-way.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 189; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  Alley between Inlots 1127 through
p. 127)                                     1150.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 415; Rev. Ord., Uncertain  Alley between Inlots 1183 and
p. 127)                                     1184.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 547; Rev. Ord.,            Alley between the right-of-way of
p. 127)                          Uncertain  the Big Four Rwy. Co. and the
                                            southeast corner of Inlot 289.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 570; Rev. Ord.,            Alley between Lot 1531 and the
p. 127)                          Uncertain  east line of the B.&O. R.R. Co.'s
                                            right-of-way.
(Rev. Ord., p. 128)              4-4-1921   Part of Leichty Ave.
35                               12-10-1923 Alley between Inlots 303-304 and
                                            927.
289                              7-5-1932   Alley between Inlots 60 and 61.
7-43                             4-19-1943  Alley between Inlots 193 and 196.
17-43                            9-7-1943   Alley between Inlots 1362 and
                                            1363.
20-43                            11-1-1943  Alley between Inlots 354 and 355.
                                            Alley south of Inlots 384 and 405
20-45                            10-15-1945 and north of Inlots 383 and 406,
                                            and reducing street width of West
                                            End Blvd. and Clowes St.
2-46                             1-21-1946  Alley running west from Walnut St.
                                            between Inlots 194 and 195.
27-46                            10-7-1946  Alley running east from Inlot 364
                                            to Inlot 1628.
                                            Alley between Grand Blvd. and
19-48                            4-5-1948   Parkwood Dr. from Lot 1127 to Lot
                                            1150.
                                            Alley beginning at the north line
14-54                            8-16-1954  of Jefferson Ave. and adjacent to
                                            Lots 1816, 1817 and 1818.
20-54                            10-4-1954  Alley adjacent to Lots 695 and
                                            696.
20-55                            8-15-1955  Alley adjacent to Lots 1688, 1689
                                            and 1691.
                                            An alley running south from the
30-56                            8-9-1956   south line of South St., between
                                            and adjacent to Inlots 221 and
                                            220.
                                            An alley located between Broadway
                                            and Second Sts., east of the east
15-57                            4-1-1957   line of Inlots 79, 80, 81 and 82
                                            and west of the west line of
                                            Inlots 139, 140, 141 and 142.
                                            An alley commencing on the east
18-57                            4-15-1957  line of Outlot 109 running
                                            parallel with Grace St. for 225
                                            feet
48-57                            9-3-1957   First alley west of Jenner Ave.
                                            between Simeon and Jefferson Aves.
                                            Confirming a previous vacation of
                                            a 20-foot alley west of Inlots
68-57                            12-16-1957 1510, 1511 and 1504 and east of
                                            the B.&O. R.R. right-of-way,
                                            extending northerly from Franklin
                                            Ave. to Monroe Ave.
                                            Confirming a previous vacation of
                                            a 20-foot alley west of Inlot 1528
69-57                            12-16-1957 and east of the B.&O. R.R. right-
                                            of-way, extending southerly from
                                            Franklin Ave.
24-59                            8-17-1959  Alley between Inlots 162 and 163
                                            on Second St.
                                            Alley between Inlots 1862, 1863
6-60                             3-7-1960   and 1864, running south from
                                            Carlton Ave.
                                            Alley between Inlots 92 and 93,
25-61                            4-17-1961  running from Broadway to the B.&O.
                                            R.R. right-of-way.
39-61                            8-7-1961   Amends Ord. 18-57.
9-62                             5-7-1962   Alley located between Inlots 86
                                            and 87.
36-63                            12-16-1963 An alley south of W. Main St. and
                                            west of Myers Ave.
                                            Alley between Inlots 288 and 289,
17-64                            8-17-1964  running southerly from Raymond
                                            Ave. 160 feet.
19-64                            9-8-1964   Two alleys northeast of Mansfield
                                            Ave. Repeals Ord. 2-64.
23-65                            7-19-1965  Alley between Inlots 222-221 and
                                            728 on the west side of Walnut St.
                                            Alley between Inlots 1922 and 690
24-65                            7-19-1965  on the east side of S. Gamble St.
                                            Repeals Ord. 16-65.
                                            Alley between Inlots 1647 through
                                            1658 and 1665 through 1676 on the
25-65                            8-2-1965   north side of E. Whitney Ave.
                                            between Clark and Sixth Sts.
                                            Repeals Ord. 22-65.
                                            An undeveloped street at the
14-68                            4-1-1968   intersection of Madison and
                                            Hamilton Aves.
31-68                            11-4-1968  Alley adjacent to the First
                                            Lutheran Church.
7-69                             4-21-1969  Alley adjacent to Most Pure Heart
                                            of Mary Church.
8-69                             4-21-1969  Alley adjacent to Most Pure Heart
                                            of Mary Church.
31-69                            10-6-1969  Alley between Water St. and
                                            Washington St.
17-70                            5-4-1970   Twenty-five-foot street between
                                            Plum and W. Smiley Aves.
                                            An alley on the east side of S.
29-70                            7-20-1970  Gamble St. between Inlots 701 and
                                            702.
                                            Portions of three alleys on the
13-75                            4-21-1975  south side of E. Main St. adjacent
                                            to Shelby Mutual Ins. Co.
                                            properties.
                                            Approving court vacation of Inlots
26-75                            9-15-1975  3001 through 3018 and portions of
                                            Jeffrey Ave. in Northwood
                                            Allotment.
                                            A 16-1/2-foot alley between Lots
32-76                            9-20-1976  117, 118 and 119 west of N. Gamble
                                            St.
                                            A 15-foot alley between Lots 454
33-76                            9-20-1976  and 455 between Second and
                                            Cleveland Sts.
                                            A 15-foot alley between Lots 763
34-76                            9-20-1976  and 764 on the south side of
                                            Summit St.
                                            A street running north and south
42-76                            10-4-1976  between Lots 1897 and 1898 south
                                            of Sherman Ave.
                                            A 16-foot alley between Lots 321
52-76                            1-17-1977  and 322 on the north side of
                                            Auburn St.
17-77                            5-9-1977   Approving a court vacation of part
                                            of Vernon Fields Allotment No. 2.
14-77                            5-16-1977  A 16-foot alley between Lots 299,
                                            300, 309 and 310.
15-77                            5-16-1977  A 16-foot alley between Lots 300
                                            and 301.
41-77                            10-17-1977 Fifteen-foot alley between Lots
                                            1425 and 1426.
                                            Fourteen-foot alley between 3rd
49-79                            10-15-1979 and 4th Sts., north of East
                                            Whitney Ave.
                                            Sixteen-foot alley between Lots
56-79                            11-19-1979 1861, 1862 and 1864 through 1873,
                                            east of Fish Ave.
                                            (1) E-W alley north of Shelby
                                            Mutual Bldg., 19 Mansfield Ave.;
                                            (2) Alley fronting Grove Ave
14-80                            9-15-1980  between Lots 1046 and 1256; (3) W.
                                            Park Dr. between Lots 2428 and
                                            2429; (4) 15-foot alley south of
                                            W. Park Dr. between Lots 2422 and
                                            2473.
                                            The alley running east from the
26-82                            10-4-1982  east right-of-way of Broadway for
                                            160 feet.
                                            An alley running east and west
27-82                            10-4-1982  between Lots 419, 420, 445 and
                                            446.
                                            An alley running north and south
19-83                            6-20-1983  between Auburn Ave. Raymond Ave.
                                            and an alley running east and west
                                            between Sharon St. and Bridge St.
38-83                            12-5-1983  An alley between Lots 44 and 48.
                                            An alley between Lots 1819 through
26-86                            9-15-1986  1825 and Lot 1844 as well as Lots
                                            1825 through 1830 and Lots 1838
                                            and 1844.
27-86                            9-15-1986  An alley between Lots 421, 422,
                                            443 and 444.
37-87                            1-4-1988   Elm St. between Lots 409 and 410.
15-88                            5-2-1988   An alley between Lots 1845 to 1851
                                            and 1883.
19-88                            6-20-1988  Amends Ord. 15-88.
15-91                            6-3-1991   An alley between Lots 456, 466,
                                            457 and 465.
24-91                            10-21-1991 An alley between Lots 1584 and
                                            1575.
11-93                            5-17-1993  An alley between Field and
                                            Broadway Sts.
31-93                            8-2-1993   Amends Ord. 11-93.
14-94                            6-6-1994   Portion of Morris Rd. between
                                            Auburn and Raymond Aves.
Res. 53-94                       11-7-1994  Vacating an alley between Lot Nos.
                                            104 and 105.
3-95                             4-3-1995   An alley between Lots 104 and 105.
11-97                            4-21-1997  Portion of an alley between Lots
                                            410 through 413 and 452.
12-97                            4-21-1997  Portion of an alley between Lots
                                            216 and 217.
69-98                            1-4-1999   An alley between Lots 325 and 326.
                                            Short St., from its intersection
43-99                            8-2-1999   with Second St. to its
                                            intersection with the platted but
                                            undeveloped portion of Oak St.
44-99                            9-7-1999   The right-of-way of the abandoned
                                            portion of Wareham Rd.
48-99                            9-20-1999  An alley between Lots 168 and 169.
                                            An alley between Lots 1830, 1831,
7-2000                           4-3-2000   1832, 1833, 1834, 1836, 1837 and
                                            1838.
                                            Declaring intent to vacate an
Res. 81-2000                     11-20-2000 alley between Lots 730, 731 and
                                            768.
                                            Declaring intent to vacate Mohican
Res. 90-2000                     12-4-2000  Street from East Smiley Ave, north
                                            to its terminus in the city.
3-2001                           2-20-2001  An alley between Lots 80, 81, 140
                                            and 141.
17-2001                          5-21-2001  An alley between Lots 730, 731 and
                                            768.
38-2001                          10-1-2001  An alley between Lots 120 and 121.
39-2001                          10-1-2001  An alley between Lots 460, 461 and
                                            462.
40-2001                          10-1-2001  An alley between Lots 634, 635 and
                                            59.
42-2001                          11-19-2001 An alley between Lots 1373, 1374,
                                            1375, 1380, 1381 and 1382.
                                            Declaring intent to vacate an
Res. 3-2002                      1-7-2002   alley between Lots 116, 1553, 117,
                                            119, 120 and 121.
Res. 4-2002                      1-7-2002   Declaring intent to vacate an
                                            alley between Lots 116 and 1553.
                                            Declaring intent to vacate an
Res. 5-2002                      1-7-2002   alley west of Lots 113, 114, 115
                                            and 1553 and east of the CSX
                                            Railroad right-of-way.
                                            Declaring intent to vacate an
Res. 11-2002                     1-22-2002  alley between Lots 430, 435, 429
                                            and 436.
                                            An alley west of lot numbers 113,
5-2002                           3-18-2002  114, 115 and 1553 and ease of the
                                            CSX Railroad right-of-way.
6-2002                           3-18-2002  An alley between lot numbers 116
                                            and 1553.
7-2002                           3-18-2002  An alley between lot numbers 116,
                                            1553, 117, 119, 120 and 121.
13-2002                          5-20-2002  An alley between lot numbers 430,
                                            435, 429 and 436.
10-2004                          5-3-2004   0.169 acre of the northernmost
                                            portion of North Third Street.
Res. 28-2004                     5-17-2004  The undeveloped portion of Myers
                                            Avenue.
Res. 30-2004                     5-17-2004  The undeveloped portion of Pine
                                            Avenue.
23-2004                          7-19-2004  0.3042 acre of Myers Avenue.
24-2004                          8-16-2004  0.2057 acre of Pine Avenue.
Res. 26-2005                     5-16-2005  Forest Street between Broadway and
                                            Cleveland Street.
28-2005                          7-5-2005   0.5357 acre of Forest Street
                                            (unimproved).
44-2005                          12-5-2005  Alley between Lots 1038 and 1039
                                            (intersecting Grove Avenue).
                                            Alley running parallel between
18-2007                          8-6-2007   Grace Street and Ray Road
                                            (intersecting with Walnut).
                                            The undeveloped portion of Second
8-2008                           5-19-2008  Street and Elm Street, as
                                            described.
                                            Dalton Avenue, as set forth in the
29-2009                          8-24-2009  legal description from July 14,
                                            2009.
                                            The section of Glenwood Drive from
42-2009                          11-2-2009  Parkwood Drive to Maxwell Drive
                                            and Gaylord Avenue.
                                            The section of Glenwood Drive
43-2009                          11-2-2009  between Parkwood Drive and
                                            Franklin Avenue.
                                            An alley running parallel between
38-2010                          12-20-2010 Broadway and Second Street within
                                            the city.
                                            Confirming the previous action of
                                            the Council vacating an alley
41-2010                          12-6-2010  between Lots 302 and 303 of the
                                            consecutively numbered lots in the
                                            city.
26-2012                          12-3-2012  Vacating a section of Dicks Drive
                                            within the city.
5-2013                           3-4-2013   Vacating Blackfork Circle within
                                            the city.
                                            Vacating an alley running
3-2014                           3-17-2014  perpendicular from Broadway
                                            between Lots 263 and 264 in the
                                            city.
13-2014                          7-7-2014   Vacating a portion of Mack Avenue
                                            within the city.
                                            Vacating a section of Blackfork
23-2014                          1-5-2015   Steet and a section of an alley
                                            between lots 551 and 1424 in the
                                            city.
                                            Vacating an alley running
26-2015                          8-17-2015  perpendicular from Second Street
                                            between lots 520 and 521 in the
                                            city.
                                            Vacating an alley running
7-2017                           4-17-2017  perpendicular of South Street
                                            between Lots 211 and 201 and 210
                                            and 202 in the city.
                                            Vacating Railroad Street and a
9-2018                           6-18-2018  portion of Sandusky Street within
                                            the city.
                                            Vacating an alley running
25-2018                          11-19-2018 perpendicular of Powell Street
                                            between Lots 523, 524, 525, and
                                            526 in the city.
                                            Vacating an alley running parallel
17-2019                          7-15-2019  with Second Street and a portion
                                            of Oak Street within the city.
                                           
 
(1996 Code, TSO C)
TABLE IV:  DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
(Ord. Book 1, p. 168; Rev. Ord.            Alley by Herman M. Dick by plat
Appendix, p. 126)               3-2-1887   filed in the office of of the Clerk
                                           on March 2, 1877.
157                             10-3-1927  Ewalts Subdivision.
338                             5-7-1934   Williams Ct. for street purposes.
526                             8-24-1939  West Park Addition for park
                                           purposes.
533                             10-18-1939 Athletic Park Dr. as roadway.
12-50                           6-5-1950   Streets and alleys in Waldruff
                                           Addition.
20-51                           5-21-1951  Streets and alleys in Northwood
                                           Allotment.
23-51                           6-4-1951   Streets in Myrtle Willis Subdivision
                                           (superseding Ord. 22-51).
                                           Sanitary sewer in Northwood
54-51                           12-17-1951 Allotment constructed by Shelby Home
                                           Development Corp.
36-56                           11-5-1956  Plat of Vernon Fields Allotment No.
                                           1.
49-57                           9-3-1957   Plat of Vernon Fields Allotment No.
                                           2.
14-58                           2-17-1958  Accepting the dedication of Martin
                                           Dr.
41-58                           8-4-1958   Accepting dedication of Oak St.
                                           extension.
9-60                            4-18-1960  Replat of Inlot 2926 and dedication
                                           of Lynn Rd.
                                           Dedication of land on the west side
35-60                           12-5-1960  of High School Ave. for sidewalk
                                           purposes.
27-61                           6-5-1961   Plat of Morrisfield Allotment No. 3.
20-65                           6-7-1965   Plat of Morrisfield No. 4 Addition.
7-66                            4-4-1966   Plat of Arlington Estates No. 2
                                           Addition.
12-66                           6-6-1966   Plat of Dan Fox Allotment and
                                           dedication of Inlot 1725.
14-66                           6-20-1966  Plat of Arlington Estates No. 3.
9-66                            7-18-1966  Plat of Rolling Acres Allotment.
                                           Dedication of strip of land 40 feet
Res. 33-66                      8-15-1966  wide and 460 feet long as an
                                           extension of Plymouth St. to N.
                                           Gamble St.
21-66                           10-3-1966  Plat of the dedication of a 40-foot
                                           extension of Plymouth St.
41-66                           12-19-1966 Plat of Crestview Allotment.
13-67                           8-7-1967   Plat of Rolling Acres Allotment.
23-67                           9-18-1967  Plat of Morrisfield No. 5.
                                           Accepting dedication of utility
10-68                           3-18-1968  lines and easements servicing the
                                           Central Ohio Industrial Park from
                                           the United States.
8-72                            2-22-1972  Accepting dedication of Carton
                                           Service Storm Sewer.
17-72                           5-15-1972  Plat of M.& C. Subdivision.
26-72                           6-19-1972  Plat of Arlington Estates No. 4.
                                           Plans and plat for Independence Dr.
Res. 34-76                      5-3-1976   and the extension of Parkwood and
                                           Glenwood Drs. in Morrisfield No. 6
                                           Addition.
Res. 37-77                      5-2-1977   Plat of Gamble's Mill Allotment No.
                                           1 Subdivision.
                                           Dedicating and accepting Taft St.,
18-77                           6-6-1977   Forest Dr., Kennedy Dr., Stambaugh
                                           St. and Roosevelt Dr. in Gamble's
                                           Mill Allotment No. 1 Subdivision.
Res. 80-78                      7-17-1978  Plat of Gamble's Mills Two
                                           Subdivision.
                                           Accepting dedication of portion of
31-78                           11-6-1978  Stambaugh Street, containing 0.10
                                           acre.
                                           Accepting dedication of portion of
29-79                           5-2-1979   Louise Dr. extension, containing
                                           0.034 acre.
47-79                           10-1-1979  Accepting dedication of portion of
                                           Kegley Road, containing 0.32 acre.
1-80                            1-28-1980  Accepting a portion of West End
                                           Blvd. for dedication.
22-81                           6-15-1981  Plat of Grauer Subdivision.
25-83                           9-6-1983   Accepting the plat of Whitney Ave.
                                           for dedication of the street.
9-87                            5-4-1987   Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Sunset Dr. Subdivision.
23-88                           8-15-1988  Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Fox Run Subdivision.
26-89                           12-4-1989  Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Gambles Mills No. 3 Subdivision.
27-89                           12-4-1989  Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Buckeye Subdivision.
27-91                           11-4-1991  Dedication of alleyway adjacent to
                                           Public Library as a street.
9-92                            4-20-1992  Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Fox Run Subdivision.
13-93                           4-19-1993  Plat of Fox Run Subdivision Phase 3.
15-93                           5-3-1993   Accepting dedication of streets of
                                           Shelby Industrial Park.
13-94                           5-2-1994   Plat of Fox Run Subdivision Phase 4.
Res. 14-95                      4-3-1995   Plat of Crestview Allotment No. 2.
8-95                            5-1-1995   Plat of Crestview Allotment No. 2.
16-95                           10-2-1995  Plat and dedication of Wareham Rd.
10-96                           2-17-1996  Plat of Fox Run Subdivision Phase 5.
32-97                           7-22-1997  Plat of Gambles Mill Allotment No. 4
                                           and accepting dedication of streets.
34-97                           7-22-1997  Plat of Riverview Estates Phase I
                                           and accepting dedication of streets.
                                           Plat of Crestview Allotment Phase
29-2000                         7-3-2000   III and accepting dedication of
                                           streets.
4-2002                          3-4-2002   Plat of Flint Street Extension and
                                           accepting dedication of streets.
6-2003                          2-3-2003   Plat of Gambles Mill No. 5 and
                                           accepting dedication of streets.
                                           Plat of Gambles Mill No. 5 and
26-2003                         6-16-2003  accepting and confirming dedication
                                           of streets and/or roadways.
                                           Plat of Crestview Allotment Phase IV
47-2003                         10-20-2003 and accepting and confirming
                                           dedication of streets and/or
                                           roadways.
                                           Plat of North Third Street right-of-
6-2004                          1-20-2004  way/street and confirming dedication
                                           to the public use of 0.93 acre of
                                           right-of-way/street.
                                           Plat of Fox Run Subdivision #6 and
13-2004                         5-17-2004  confirming dedication to the public
                                           use of the rights-of-way contained
                                           therein.
                                           Plat of Grove Avenue Extension and
17-2004                         5-17-2004  confirming dedication to the public
                                           use of 0.2860 acre of right-of-way/
                                           street.
29-2004                         9-20-2004  Second Street sanitary sewer
                                           extension.
20-2007                         7-16-2007  Plat of Fox Run Subdivision No. 7
                                           rights-of-way.
                                           Accepting dedication of 0.71 acre as
18-2008                         6-2-2008   right-of-way street known as
                                           "Wareham Road".
                                           Plat of Wolf Run Park Subdivision
34-2008                         9-15-2008  Block 1 and accepting and confirming
                                           dedication to the public use of the
                                           utilities, streets and/or roadways.
                                           Plat of Technology Park Subdivision,
8-2009                          3-2-2009   and accepting and confirming
                                           dedication to the public use of the
                                           utilities, streets and/or roadways.
(1996 Code, TSO D)
                                           Approving the plat and accepting and
11-2010                         4-5-2010   confirming for dedication to public
                                           use the utilities and right-of-way
                                           of East Smiley Avenue.
                                           Accepting and confirming for
12-2013                         3-4-2013   dedication to the public use 0.782
                                           acres of right-of-way/street as
                                           Reservoir Road.
                                           Accepting and confirming for
27-2015                         7-20-2015  dedication to the public use the
                                           utilities, streets and/or roadways
                                           of Black Fork Commons.
 
TABLE V:  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
     1-
161  16-  Sale of portion of sewer farm.
     1928
     11-
317  20-  Purchase of waterworks plant and system of Shelby Water Co.
     1933
     10-
531  2-   Accepting grant of Outlot 152.
     1937
     5-
514  15-  Sale of Inlot 1706.
     1939
10-  8-
44   21-  Authorizes sale of cemetery real estate.
     1944
21-  5-
53   18-  Purchase of the Mickey Addition in Sharon Twp. except Lots 1, 6 and 13 to 21.
     1953
31-  12-
54   16-  Purchase of land on Mohican St. at corner of Main St.
     1954
14-  6-
55   20-  Purchase of Lot 1555, Richland City.
     1955
14-  5-
56   21-  The north 30 feet of Inlot 719 and all of Inlot 718.
     1956
34-  10-
56   1-   Authorizes sale of Inlots 1743, 1706 and 1744.
     1956
24-  4-
58   21-  Authorizes sale of Inlots 1706, 1743 and 1744.
     1958
1-61 1-3- Authorizes the sale and removal of the house on Inlot 718.
     1961
Res. 2-3- Authorizes purchase of Building T-18 and approximately 8.523 acres at the
8-64 1963 Shelby Air Force Depot.
11-  6-1- Authorizes sale of part of Outlot 54.
64   1964
23-  11-
64   16-  Authorizes sale of part of Outlot 54. Amends Ord. 11-64.
     1964
12-  3-
65   15-  Authorizes sale of Inlots 1743 and 1744.
     1965
36-  10-  Authorizes purchase of 2,280 sq. ft. of real estate from B.&O. R.R. Co. for
65   5-   the Municipal Light Plant improvement.
     1965
36-  12-
66   5-   Authorizes sale of Building T-18 in the Central Ohio Industrial Park.
     1966
Res. 7-9-
34-  1968 Authorizes purchase of St. Mary's Gymnasium for City garage.
68
Res. 6-2-
29-  1969 Authorizes purchase of the Sharon Twp. Building.
69
Res.
35-  - -  Authorizes purchase of the Sutter Building at 18-20 W. Main St.
69
44-  12-
69   15-  Authorizes sale of former City Dump located in Cass Twp.
     1969
40-  12-  Authorizes purchase of the "Old Mutual Building" and a parking lot on Central
73   3-   Ave. for city offices.
     1973
Res. 12-
82-  16-  Authorizes purchase of Mynhier property.
74   1974
Res. 5-   Authorizes option to purchase agreement with the Shelby Y.M.C.A. for a 1.59
43-  17-  acre parcel on W. Tucker Ave.
76   1976
43-  10-
76   4-   Authorizes purchase of 1.555 acre parcel from the Shelby Y.M.C.A.
     1976
Res. 10-
90-  3-   Authorizes purchase of Shelby Lumber Co. property for city use.
77   1977
49-  11-  Authorizing sale of electric distribution storage building at rear of Whitney
77   21-  Ave.
     1977
Res. 1-   Authorizes bids for sale of Light Plant Building at E. Whitney and Mohican
6-78 16-  Sts.
     1978
Res. 4-
55-  17-  Authorizes sale of electric distribution buildings to Woodrow Racer.
78   1978
Res. 6-5-
71-  1978 Authorizes purchase of 1.555 acres from Shelby Y.M.C.A.
78
5-80 3-3- Appropriates fee simple interest in certain property described in Res. 11-80,
     1980 Exhibit A, for transformer site.
Res. 5-
38-  19-  Authorizes purchase of Hoover property for substation.
80   1980
     3-   Authorizes sale of property upon which the Walnut St. Electric Power
2-84 19-  Substation existed.
     1984
22-  9-2- Authorizes the Board of Park Commissioners to sell Rome-South Road Park.
86   1986
Res. 4-6-
26-  1987 Authorizes purchase of 2.04 acres adjoining wastewater treatment plant.
87
Res. 7-
30-  15-  Authorizes purchase of real estate for construction of a reservoir.
91   1991
Res. 7-
31-  15-  Authorizes purchase of real estate for construction of a reservoir.
91   1991
Res. 7-
32-  15-  Authorizes purchase of real estate for construction of a reservoir.
91   1991
Res. 8-5- Authorizes purchase of real estate from Shelby Board of Education for an
38-  1991 industrial park.
91
Res. 7-6- Authorizes purchase agreement with Shelby Board of Education for land for an
35-  1992 industrial park.
92
Res. 8-   Authorizes transfer of 1.8 acres at 5 Firestone Rd. to the Community
44-  16-  Improvement Corporation.
93   1993
30-  12-  Appropriates easement for the public purpose of improvement of High School
94   5-   Ave. with a sanitary sewer.
     1994
47-  9-
99   20-  Authorizes sale of Outlot 26, located at 24 E. Whitney Ave.
     1999
Res. 9-5- Authorizes option to purchase agreement with Stoney and Doris Mullins for
66-  2000 rehabilitation of Reservoir No. 2.
2000
Res. 12-  Authorizes purchase of property located on Mickey Rd., adjacent to Reservoir
94-  18-  No. 2, from Stoney and Doris Mullins.
2000 2000
Res. 2-5- Authorizes purchase of the east one-half of Lot 3535 in the Mickey's
17-  2001 Allotment, from Stoney and Doris Mullins.
2001
Res. 2-   Accepting title to Inlot Number 558 and the 16 feet of vacated alley to the
27-  20-  east of the lot, from Shelby Insurance Company.
2001 2001
Res. 2-3- Authorizing acquisition of the 57 acres adjacent to and contiguous with the
7-   2003 wastewater treatment facility.
2003
Res. 4-7-
18-  2003 Accepting title to a portion of Outlot No. 142.
2003
Res. 8-   Authorizes appropriation of part of the northwest quarter of Sec. 33, Twp. 23,
46-  16-  Range 19, Cass Twp..
2004 2004
31-  9-7- Authorizes appropriation of property for an expansion for the waste water
2004 2004 treatment plant.
46-  1-
2004 18-  Authorizes sale of Lot 2725 and part of a vacated alley.
     2005
4-   2-   Authorizes sale of the site of the former sanitary sewer lift  station at the
2005 22-  southeast corner of Curtis Drive and Firestone Road.
     2005
          Authorizes sale of 2.914 acres of property located within the Central Ohio
33-  8-1- Industrial Park known as the "city's coal storage pile," and designating
2005 2005 Community Improvement Corporation of Shelby Ohio, Inc. as the city's agent in
          the sale.
Res. 8-1- Authorizes acquisition of 1.772 acres adjacent to and contiguous with the
38-  2005 electric line department, being a part of the northwest quarter of Sec. 5,
2005      Twp. 22, Range 19, Sharon Twp.
32-  9-   Authorizes sale of property located at 15 Park Avenue and at the southwest
2015 21-  corner of Park and Mack Avenues and designates Community Improvement
     2015 Corporation of Shelby, Ohio, Inc. as the city’s agent in the sale.
35-  1-   Authorizes sale of property being Lot 588 and parts of Lot 245 in Samuel
2016 17-  Sutters & Others Addition.
     2017
16-  9-5- Authorizes sale of real property owned by the city and designating the
2017 2017 Community Improvement Corporation of Shelby, Ohio, Inc. as the city’s agent in
          the sale.
17-  7-3- Authorizes sale of real property owned by the city and designating the
2017 2017 Community Improvement Corporation of Shelby, Ohio, Inc. as the city’s agent in
          the sale.
 
(1996 Code, TSO E)
TABLE VI:  LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
22-  5-   Ninety-nine year lease of right-of-way from N.J. and G.M. Briner in
53   18-  Cass Twp.
     1953
37-  11-
56   5-   30 Mansfield Ave.
     1956
39-  12-
56   3-   An apartment at 27 E. Main St.
     1956
Res. 12-  Authorizes two-year lease with the trustees of Sharon Twp. for the
80-  2-   second floor of the Sharon Twp. Building.
57   1957
Res. 11-  Authorizes two-year lease with the trustees of Sharon Twp. for the
40-  7-   second floor of the Sharon Twp. Building.
60   1960
Res. 7-   Authorizes Mayor to lease land for landfill waste disposal for not
38-  20-  more than ten years.
64   1964
Res. 5-3- Cancelling lease with I. and M. Wallen for a 120-acre tract used as a
15-  1965 City Dump.
65
39-  11-  Authorizes lease of property from the B.&O. R.R. Co. for a loading
65   1-   and unloading facility adjacent to the Municipal Light Plant.
     1965
Res. 2-
9-68 19-  Lease of garage from Shelby Pythian Castle.
     1968
     3-
968  18-  Authorizes lease of city property lying east of Mansfield Ave.
     1968
Res. l-
3-69 20-  Authorizes lease of the City Building on W. Main St. from Sharon Twp.
     1969
Res. 8-4- Lease by city of land south of the fire station on E. Main St. from
42-  1969 the Board of Education.
69
44-  12-
69   15-  Authorizes lease of former City Dump located in Cass Twp.
     1969
     1-   Authorizes lease of the old Shelby Mutual Building to present
5-74 21-  tenants.
     1974
Res. 8-   Authorizes lease from Shelby Board of Education, northeast corner of
70-  15-  Outlot 138 with building.
77   1977
Res. 5-2- Authorizes lease with Shelby Board of Education and friends of the
23-  1983 Log Cabin.
83
Res. 9-   Authorizes lease agreement with U.S. Army for the installation of a
56-  16-  precipitation station.
85   1985
Res. 2-8- Authorizes lease agreement with AMP-Ohio for property at the Electric
8-   2000 Distribution Dept., for location of a generator.
2000
35-  9-4- Authorizes lease of city property containing 2.914 acres in the
2001 2001 Central Ohio Industrial Park.
1-   1-3- Authorizes lease of the former Shelby Senior Center at 40 Mansfield
2005 2005 Avenue.
10-  4-   Authorizes an agriculture lease to the Board of Education of the
2014 21-  Shelby City School District.
     2014
26-  1-   Authorizes lease of certain parcels of real estate no longer needed
2014 20-  for any municipal purpose.
     2015
4-   2-1- Authorizes lease of certain parcels of real estate no longer needed
2016 2016 for any municipal purpose.
4-   2-4- Determining that certain real property and building owned by the city
2019 2019 be leased and designating the Community Improvement Corporation of
          Shelby, Ohio, Inc., as the city’s agent in the lease agreement.
19-  8-5- Authorizes the lease of certain parcels of real estate.
2019 2019
         
 
(1996 Code, TSO F)
TABLE VII:  STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
(Ord. Book 1, p. 52; Rev. Ord. Sec.    Uncertain Flint St.
70)
(Ord. Book 1, pp. 60, 55, 71; Rev.     Uncertain Broadway St., north, between station zero and station 4.3.
Ord. Sec. 63)
(Ord. Book 1, p. 63; Rev. Ord. Sec.    Uncertain Broadway St. between Main St. and Smiley Ave.
64)
(Ord. Book 1, p. 85; Rev. Ord. Sec.    Uncertain Gamble St.
59)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 143; Rev. Ord. Sec.   Uncertain Tucker Ave.
73)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 245; Rev. Ord. Sec.   Uncertain Auburn St.
72)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 245; Rev. Ord.  Sec. Uncertain Wilson Ave.
71)
(Ord. Book 3, p. 8; Rev. Ord. Sec. 62) Uncertain Broadway St.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 9; Rev. Ord. Sec. 74) Uncertain Smiley Ave.
(Ord. Book 3, p. 77; Rev. Ord. Sec.    Uncertain Gamble St. from Main St. north to the north line of Marvin Ave.
60)
(Ord. Book 3, p. 239; Rev. Ord. Sec.   Uncertain Mohican St.
75)
(Ord. Book 3, p. 524; Rev. Ord. Sec.   Uncertain Water St.
76)
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 61)                    Uncertain Gamble St. north of Smiley Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 65)                    Uncertain Second St. between Main St. and Flint St.
(Rev. Ord. Secs. 69, 79)               Uncertain Marvin Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 77)                    Uncertain Sharon St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 80)                    Uncertain Plumb Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 81)                    Uncertain Seltzer Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 82)                    Uncertain Myers Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 83)                    Uncertain Park Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 84)                    Uncertain South St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 85)                    Uncertain Whitney Ave., east.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 86)                    Uncertain Third St. from Main St. to Smiley Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 87)                    Uncertain High School Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 88)                    Uncertain Mack Ave. from High School Ave. to Tucker Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 90)                    Uncertain Church St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 92)                    Uncertain Steel Ave. from Main St. to Grove Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 93)                    Uncertain Main St., west.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 94)                    Uncertain Main St., east.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 94)                    Uncertain Main St. from projection of east line of Brucker Dr. east to
                                                 intersection of west line of Roberts Dr.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 95)                    Uncertain North Dr. of Boulevard.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 96)                    Uncertain South Dr. of Boulevard.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 98)                    Uncertain Wentz Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 97)                    Uncertain Clark Ave.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 99)                    Uncertain Oak St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 99)                    Uncertain Tucker Ave. from Mack Ave. to B.&O. R.R. right-of-way.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 100)                   Uncertain Blackfork St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101A)                  Uncertain Fourth St.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101B)                  Uncertain Main St., extension of.
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101)                   Uncertain Walnut St.
371                                    Uncertain Jefferson Ave., east.
23                                     6-18-1923 Blackfork St. renamed Central Ave.
99                                     6-7-1926  Gamble St., north, between Marvin Ave. and Smiley Ave.
106                                    8-23-1926 Williams Ave. between Main St. and Grove Ave.
125                                    2-21-1927 West Park Dr. (the Works addition).
127                                    3-7-1927  Jefferson Ave. from corporation line west to B.&O. right-of-way.
131                                    4-4-1927  Raymond St. between Morris Ave. and Bridge St.
169                                    4-2-1928  Whitney Ave. between N. Gamble St. and Broadway.
176                                    6-18-1928 Tucker Ave., west, from S. Gamble St. to Walnut St.
193                                    3-2-1929  Washington St.
203                                    7-1-1929  West St. from north line of W. Main St. to south line of Smiley
                                                 Ave.
204                                    8-5-1929  Monroe Ave. from west line of Mansfield Ave. to B.&O.  right-of-
                                                 way.
220                                    10-21-    Gaylord Ave. from Mansfield Ave. west to B.&O. R.R.
                                       1929
278                                    2-15-1932 Whitney Ave. from Gamble St., west.
363                                    3-4-1935  Earl Ave.
365                                    3-18-1935 Smiley Ave., east.
379                                    9-16-1935 Whitney Ave. from Clark Ave. to east corporation line.
380                                    9-16-1935 Madison Ave., east.
425                                    3-15-1937 Mack Ave.
426                                    3-15-1937 Gaylord Ave.
10-45                                  5-7-1945  Vernon Rd. from W. Main St. to W. Park Dr.
8-47                                   3-2-1947  Part of Franklin Ave. renamed Glenwood Dr.
11-49                                  2-10-1949 Madison Ave. renamed Simeon Ave.
33-51                                  10-1-1951 Jeffrey Ave.
34-51                                  10-1-1951 Shelby Ave.
35-51                                  10-1-1951 Simeon Ave.
36-51                                  10-1-1951 Maxwell Dr., west.
37-51                                  10-1-1951 West End Blvd.
13-52                                  4-21-1952 Grand Blvd. extended.
14-53                                  4-20-1953 Plum St. from its intersection with Post St., west.
23-53                                  6-1-1953  Long St. from its intersection with West End Blvd. to the
                                                 intersection with W. Main St.
40-53                                  9-8-1953  Vernon Rd. from its intersection with W. Main St. to Grove Ave.
45-53                                  9-21-1953 Woodland Rd.
21-54                                  10-4-1954 Dale Ave.
27-54                                  12-5-1954 N. Broadway St. renamed Broadway St.
27-54                                  12-5-1954 S. Broadway St. renamed Mansfield Ave.
5-56                                   2-20-1956 Glenwood Dr.
5-56                                   2-20-1956 Harriette Dr.
5-56                                   2-20-1956 Morrisfield No. 2 Allotment for Parkwood Dr., Glenwood Dr. and
                                                 Harriette Dr.
5-56                                   2-20-1956 Park Ave. Extension.
5-56                                   2-20-1956 Parkwood Dr.
14-58                                  2-17-1958 Grade of Martin Dr.
44-58                                  9-2-1958  Change of grade on Taft St.
20-59                                  8-3-1959  Grade of Jefferson Ave. between Mack Ave. and Jenner Ave.
14-60                                  6-6-1960  Grade of Steel Ave. between Auburn St. and the north property
                                                 line of Shelby Memorial Hospital.
23-63                                  8-5-1963  Revised grade of N. Broadway from the south side of Flint St.
                                                 north to the centerline of the N.Y.C. R.R.
27-63                                  9-16-1963 Grade of W. Smiley Ave. from the centerline of West St. west to
                                                 the proposed west corporation line.
31-63                                  12-2-1963 Grade of West St. from W. Smiley Ave. south to Marvin Ave.
32-63                                  12-2-1963 Grade of Morningside Dr. from Mansfield Ave. east to Bradley Rd.
1-64                                   1-6-1964  Grade of Post St. from W. Smiley Ave. south to Marvin Ave.
23-81                                  6-16-1981 Coleman Dr. renamed Louise Dr.
27-91                                  11-4-1991 An alleyway adjacent to the Public Library renamed Library St.
24-92                                  1-4-1993  Hamilton Ave. renamed Quality Dr.
21-94                                  9-6-1994  Field St. renamed Cleveland St.
Res. 84-99                             11-15-    Unnamed, dedicated thoroughfare between Broadway and Second St.,
                                       1999      north of Inlots 524 and 525 and south of Outlot 15, as Powell St.
Res. 16-2001                           2-5-2001  Access roadway from Mickey Rd. to Reservoir No. 2 and the
                                                 property adjacent (the westerly half of Lot 3535), as Mullins Dr.
11-2003                                3-17-2003 Williams Avenue renamed Williams Court.
45-2003                                11-3-2003 Auburn Street to Auburn Avenue; Plumb Avenue to Plum Avenue; and
                                                 Sherwood Road to Sherwood Drive.
 
(1996 Code, TSO G)
 
Ord./Res. No. Date      Description
2-2010        2-1-2010  Central Avenue renamed Blackfork Street.
3-2010        3-15-2010 Richland Avenue renamed Blackfork Circle.
                        A section of Dicks Drive from the north right-of-way
22-2013       6-17-2013 line of Joelynn Drive, northerly to the north terminus
                        of Dicks Drive renamed Whippet Way.
 
TABLE VIII:  ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
(Rev.
Ord.      Uncertain Detachment of all of Inlot 544 by order of Common Pleas Court of Richland
Appendix,           County, Sept. 1922.
p. 124)
(Rev.
Ord.      Uncertain Detachment of the east 332 feet of Outlot 18 and all of Outlot 19 by
Appendix,           order of the Common Pleas Court of Richland County, Mar. 1922.
p. 124)
(Rev.
Ord.      Uncertain Detachment of real estate owned by S.F. Stambaugh et al. by order of
Appendix,           Common Pleas Court of Richland County.
p. 124)
(Rev.
Ord.      Uncertain Annexation of territory beginning in the center of W. Main St., 8.4 feet
Appendix,           west of the center of Vernon Rd.
p. 125)
(Ord.               Detachment of southeast quarter of Sec. 6, Twp. 22, Range 19, except for
Book 2,   Uncertain a portion thereof.
p. 109)
(Ord.               Detachment of part of north half of northeast quarter of Sec. 7, Twp. 22,
Book 2,   Uncertain Range 19.
p. 111)
(Ord.
Book 2,   Uncertain Detachment of part of southwest quarter of Sec. 5, Twp. 22, Range 19.
p. 150)
(Ord.               Detachment of 15 acres, on west side of N. Gamble St., of the southwest
Book 2,   Uncertain quarter of Sec. 5, Twp. 22, Range 19.
p. 160)
(Ord.
Book 2,   Uncertain Detachment of part of Subdivision 28, Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19.
p. 240)
(Ord.
Book 2,
p. 256;   Uncertain Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19.
Rev. Ord.
Appendix,
p. 124)
(Ord.
Book 3,             Annexation of territory beginning on the east line of the southwest
p. 548;   Uncertain quarter of Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19, at the intersection of the south
Rev. Ord.           line of Simeon Ave.
Appendix,
p. 124)
(Ord.
Book 3,             Annexation of territory beginning on the east line of the southwest
p. 548;   8-16-1910 quarter of Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19, at the intersection of the south
Rev. Ord.           line of Simeon Ave.
Appendix,
p. 124)
                    Annexation of part of quarter of Sec. 8, Twp. 22, Range 19, commencing on
124       2-7-1927  present corporation line east of Walnut St. and 100 feet south of
                    intersection of south line of Grace Ave. and east line of Walnut St.
177       7-2-1928  Annexation of territory beginning at angle of corporation line on the
                    east quarter of Sec. 8, Sharon Twp., on the north line of Inlot 1986.
                    Annexation of territory beginning at angle in south corporation line of
189       1-21-1929 city in southeast quarter of Sec. 18, Sharon Twp., east of S. Broadway on
                    the quarter section line of north line of Inlot 1986.
222       11-18-    Annexation of remainder of Bahl Addition.
          1929
                    Annexation of territory beginning at southwest corner of northwest
428A      4-5-1937  quarter of Sec. 9, Twp. 22, Range 19, Jackson Twp., on eastern
                    corporation line of city.
                    Annexation of part of southwest quarter of Sec. 9, Jackson Twp.,
15-41     6-16-1941 beginning at northwest corner of such quarter section on present
                    corporation line.
6-44      2-21-1944 Annexation of part of southwest quarter of Sec. 9 of Jackson Twp.,
                    beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 2733, City of Shelby.
18-45     10-1-1945 Annexation of part of northwest quarter of Sec. 9, Jackson Twp.
26-45     12-3-1945 Annexation of Mac Park Addition.
                    Annexation of part of southwest quarter, Sec. 8, Sharon Twp.; part of
                    southwest quarter of Sec. 8 and the northwest quarter of Sec. 17, Sharon
25-46     9-16-1946 Twp.; part of southeast quarter, Sec. 17, Sharon Twp. and part of
                    northwest quarter, Sec. 16, Jackson Twp.; part of northwest quarter, Sec.
                    16, and the southwest quarter, Sec. 9, Jackson Twp.
9-47      3-17-1947 Annexation of part of southwest quarter, Sec. 9, Jackson Twp.
14-48     3-1-1948  Annexation of part of southwest quarter, Sec. 8, Sharon Twp.
30-48     9-20-1948 Annexation of Lots 1 to 11 in Lenza D. Post Subdivision.
10-49     2-8-1949  Annexation of part of northeast quarter of Sec. 7, Sharon Twp.
37-53     8-17-1953 Annexation of territory purchased from M.I. Best for school building
                    site.
38-53     8-17-1953 Annexation of territory from R.A. and L. Mickey in Sharon Twp., being
                    part of northeast quarter, Sec. 17, Twp. 22, Range 19.
15-54     9-7-1954  Annexation of territory beginning on north line of southwest quarter,
                    Sec. 9, Twp. 22, Range 19.
23-54     12-20-    Annexation of Westview Allotment.
          1954
6-55      3-21-1955 Annexation of territory beginning on the north line of southwest quarter,
                    Sec. 9, Twp. 22, Range 19.
11-55     6-6-1955  Annexation of part of southwest quarter, Sec. 8, Sharon Twp.
26-55     10-17-    Annexation of southwest quarter, Sec. 8, Sharon Twp.
          1955
2-56      1-16-1956 Annexation of Westview Allotment.
4-56      2-6-1956  Annexation of part of northwest quarter of Sec. 9, Jackson Twp.
32-56     3-4-1956  Annexation of C. Stambaugh Allotment "2".
9-56      4-2-1956  Annexation of part of southwest quarter, Sec. 7, Twp. 22, Range 19,
                    Sharon Twp.
Res. 18-  4-2-1956  Annexation of 16.30 acres in Lot 2774, City of Shelby.
56
23-56     7-2-1956  Annexation of Lots 1 through 37 in Plainview Allotment and Dowds School
                    property.
33-56     3-4-1957  Annexation of Westview Allotment.
28-57     6-17-1957 Annexation of 6.0 acres in the northwest quarter of Sec. 16, Jackson Twp.
                    and 56.5 acres in the northeast quarter of Sec.  17, Sharon Twp.
44-57     8-5-1957  Annexation of 4.58 acres, being part of the northwest quarter of Sec. 7,
                    Twp. 22, Range 19.
20-58     4-7-1958  Annexation of Dowds School property and other territory.
42-58     8-4-1958  Annexation of Fox and Shade Allotment No. 1.
5-61      2-6-1961  Annexation of 79.61 acres in Jackson Twp.
15-62     6-18-1962 Annexation of 2.86 acres in Jackson Twp.
30-63     12-2-1963 Annexation of territory adjacent to S. Gamble St.
34-63     12-16-    Annexation of territory in Sharon and Plymouth Twps.  from E. Whisler et
          1963      al.
35-63     12-16-    Annexation of 23.83 acres in Jackson Twp.
          1963
3-64      1-6-1964  Annexation of territory adjacent to W. Smiley Ave.
3-66      2-21-1966 Annexation of 9.42 acres in Sharon Twp.
13-66     6-20-1966 Annexation of 31.19 acres in Sharon Twp.
15-66     6-20-1966 Annexation of 7.06 acres in Jackson Twp.
16-66     8-5-1966  Annexation of 2.06 acres in Jackson Twp.
18-66     9-6-1966  Annexation of 46 acres in Sharon Twp.
6-67      4-3-1967  Annexation of 2.06 acres in Jackson Twp.
11-67     6-19-1967 Annexation of 84.82 acres in Secs. 12 and 7 of Sharon Twp.
25-67     10-2-1967 Accepting annexation of 41.23 acres in Sec. 9, Jackson  Twp.
7-68      3-4-1968  Annexation of 14.49 acres in Sharon Twp.
15-69     8-17-1970 Annexation of 1 acre in Sharon Twp.
18-69     7-7-1969  Annexation of 82.97 acres in Sharon Twp. belonging to H. McFarland, et
                    al.
20-69     7-22-1969 Annexation of 6 acres in Sharon Twp.
39-69     11-3-1969 Annexation of 30.93 acres in Sharon Twp.
40-69     11-3-1969 Accepting annexation from Sharon Twp. of the Burdge-Hodges Addition.
6-70      2-2-1970  Annexation of 6 acres in Sharon Twp., known as the City Park Addition.
8-75      2-18-1975 Annexation of 2.01 acres in Sharon Twp.
39-76     9-20-1976 Annexation of 18.97 acres in Sharon Twp.
49-76     12-6-1976 Annexation of 11.01 acres in Jackson Twp.
33-77     9-16-1977 Annexation of 165.14 acres in Jackson and Sharon Twps.
5-78      2-27-1978 Annexation of 85.447 acres in Sharon Twp.
15-78     6-19-1978 Annexation of 21.61 acres in Plymouth Twp.
32-79     5-7-1979  Annexation of Waite Subdivision in Sharon Twp., containing 33.06 acres.
Res. 43-  8-6-1979  Accepts annexation application for certain territory known as Kegley
79                  Acres, in Sharon Twp.
53-79     10-1-1979 Accepts annexation application for certain territory known as the
                    Mansfield Avenue-George Hawk Rd. Annexation, Jackson County.
54-79     10-1-1979 Accepts annexation application for certain territory known as the Ray
                    Frish Allotment in Sharon Twp.
Res. 5-80 1-21-1980 Authorizes Law Director to proceed with Baylor and McGuire annexations.
6-81      2-16-1981 Accepts annexation of certain territories known as the Baylor Addition in
                    Sharon Twp., Richland County.
Res. 37-  6-15-1981 Accepts the Mickey Rd. annexation.
81
Res. 71-  12-19-    Accepts annexation of certain territory known as the Wareham Rd.
83        1983      annexation in Jackson Twp.
Res. 46-  9-17-1984 Accepts annexation of property known as the Weidner Rd. annexation in
84                  Sharon Twp.
Res. 68-  11-18-    Accepts annexation of land known as the East Smiley Rd. annexation in
85        1985      Jackson Twp.
Res. 52-  6-1-1987  Accepts annexation of 1.505 acres on Rt. 61 in Sharon Twp. 
87
Res. 36-  6-7-1993  Accepts annexation of land known as the Clayton Hallmark Annexation in
93                  Sharon Twp.
Res. 62-  12-6-1993 Authorizes Mayor to sign annexation petition for lands owned by the city
93                  in Cass and Plymouth Twps.
Res. 4-95 2-6-1995  Accepts annexation of 1.4854 acres in Fox Run Subdivision No. 4 in
                    Jackson Twp.
Res. 25-  5-4-1998  Accepts annexation of 1.10 acres known as the Gregory and Kramer, Inc.,
98                  Annexation in Sharon Twp.
Res. 32-  6-7-1999  Accepts annexation of 0.9679 acres known as the Arnold Annexation in
99                  Jackson Twp.
Res. 65-  8-16-1999 Accepts annexation of property known as the Crestview Farms, Inc., Shelby
99                  City Schools and G. & M. Whisler Annexation in Sharon Twp.
Res. 94-  12-20-    Accepts annexation of 2.14 acres known as the Friebel Annexation in
99        1999      Jackson Twp.
Res. 83-  10-1-2001 Accepts annexation of property known as the Sanchez/Varner Annexation in
2001                Jackson Twp.
Res. 45-  4-16-2001 Accepts annexation of Parcel A and Parcel B known as the Schag Annexation
2001                in Sharon Twp.
Res. 21-  3-19-2002 Accepts annexation of property known as the Heatherwood Annexation in
2002                Sharon Twp.
Res. 25-  4-15-2002 Accepts annexation of property known as the Phillips Annexation in
2002                Plymouth, Cass and Sharon Twp.
Res. 64-  10-22-    Accepts annexation of property known as the Keinath Annexation in Jackson
2004      2004      Twp.
Res. 9-   1-17-2006 Accepts annexation of a certain parcel of land known as the East Side
2006                Annexation in Jackson Twp.
Res. 23-  5-1-2006  Accepts annexation of a certain parcel of land known as the Southside
2006                Annexation in Jackson Twp.
Res. 30-  7-3-2006  Accepts annexation of a certain parcel of land known as the Southside
2006                Annexation in Jackson Twp.
Res. 6-   1-22-2007 Accepts annexation of a certain parcel of land known as the Northside
2007                Annexation in Plymouth Twp.
 
(1996 Code, TSO H)
TABLE IX:  ZONING MAP CHANGES
Editor's note:
   Zoning Map changes antedating the date of the enactment of the city's latest
Zoning Code (March 4, 1991) are superfluous.
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
15-  7-
92   20-  Outlots 57 and 58, from I-1 to R-2.
     1992
16-  7-
92   20-  Rezoning a portion of B-3 property to OS-1.
     1992
10-  4-
93   19-  6.3452 acres in or near Fox Run Subdivision No. 2, from OS-1 to R-1.
     1993
17-  6-
93   21-  11 Raymond Ave., from R-2 to I-1.
     1993
4-95 4-3- Part of the northeast and northwest quarters of Sec. 16, Twp. 22, Range 19,
     1995 Jackson Twp., from OS-1 to I-1.
17-  10-
95   16-  Changing the zoning of certain land from B-3 to I-2.
     1995
1-96 2-5- Part of the southeast and southwest quarters of Sec. 9, Twp. 22, Range 19,
     1996 Jackson Twp., from OS-1 to R-1.
2-96 2-5- Part of Outlot 28 and part of the southeast quarter of Sec. 5, Twp. 22, Range
     1996 19, Sharon Twp., from R-3 to MHP.
     4-   Part of the northwest quarter of Sec. 16, Twp. 22, Range 19, Jackson Twp.,
9-96 15-  from B-3 to B-1.
     1996
20-  7-
96   15-  Fox Run Subdivision Nos. 1A, 2 and 4, from OS-1 to R-1.
     1996
36-  12-  2.54 acres on S. Gamble St. (formerly owned by the Shelby Equity Exchange)
96   2-   from B-3 to I-2.
     1996
39-  1-
97   20-  0.21 acres of the property of Cooper Enterprises, Inc., from B-3 to I-2.
     1998
7-98 3-2- Part of Outlot 28 and Lot 1928, from MHP to R-3.
     1998
20-  6-   1.10 acres recently annexed (the Gregory & Kramer, Inc., Annexation), zoned
98   15-  as B-1.
     1998
21-  6-
98   15-  4.42 acres recently annexed (the Clayton Hallmark Annexation), zoned as R-2.
     1998
22-  6-
98   15-  Part of Lots 376 and 377, from I-2 to R-2.
     1998
31-  6-
98   15-  Property owned by R.E.L. Properties, from R-2 to B-2.
     1998
64-  11-  Correcting an error in the official Zoning Districts Map by placing the
98   2-   property located at 47 S. Gamble St. in the adjacent R-2 District.
     1998
36-  8-2- 0.9679 acres recently annexed (the Arnold Annexation), zoned as B-3.
99   1999
49-  9-   152.462 acres recently annexed (the Crestview Farms, Inc., Shelby City
99   20-  Schools and G. & M. Whisler Annexation), zoned as R-1, R-2 and R-3.
     1999
13-  4-
2000 17-  Lot 615 and the east parts of Lots 614 and 616, from R-2 to C-D.
     2000
14-  4-
2000 18-  2.14 acres recently annexed (the Friebel Annexation), zoned as B-3.
     2000
Res. 1-7- Approving application for placement of farmland in an Agricultural District,
1-   2002 filed by Crestview Farms, Inc.
2002
55-  2-
2001 19-  54.7008 acres recently annexed (the Sanchez/Varner Annexation), zoned as B-3.
     2002
2-   3-
2002 18-  Certain areas designated as R-1 to R-1A.
     2002
12-  6-
2002 17-  1.33 acres recently annexed (Schag Annexation), zoned as R-2.
     2002
21-  7-
2002 17-  4 acres recently annexed (Heatherwood Annexation), zoned as R-1.
     2002
35-  8-5- 342.73 acres recently annexed (Northside/Phillips Annexation), zoned as R-2.
2002 2002
29-  8-
2003 18-  Certain areas designated as R-2 to B-3.
     2003
40-  9-   Correcting designation of properties located at 40 Mickey Rd. and 150 South
2003 15-  Martin Dr. from R-1-A to B-3.
     2003
67-  1-   Rezoning that property being part of the southwest quarter of Sec. 16, Twp.
2003 20-  22, Range 19, Jackson Twp., from B-3 to R1-A.
     2004
68-  1-
2003 20-  Fox Run Subdivision, Phase 6, from OS-1 to R-1.
     2004
5-   5-2- 154 Broadway, formerly known as Amvets Post 13, from R-2 to I-1.
2004 2004
62-  12-  Correcting a zoning map error:  the properties at 147 Broadway, 144 Second
2005 5-   Street and 3 Powell Street have been listed in the I-1 District.  Correcting
     2005 the zoning map to place the properties in the adjacent R-2 District.
9-   4-   Rezoning that property being part of the northeast and northwest quarters of
2006 17-  Sec. 16, Twp. 22, Range 19, Jackson Twp., from OS-1 to I-1.
     2006
16-  8-3- Establishing a zoning classification for 72.096 acres, referred to as the
2006 2006 Southside Annexation, as I-2 and B-3.
29-  10-  Establishing a zoning classification for 272.7677 acres, referred to as the
2006 20-  East Side Annexation, as R-1, B-3 and R-2.
     2006
7-   5-   Rezoning the property at the east end of Flint Street (Richland County Parcel
2007 21-  #0460801217000) from MHP to R-2A.
     2007
10-  6-   Establishing a zoning classification for 11.62 acres recently annexed, part
2007 18-  of the Northside Annexation, as I-1; and 39.99 acres recently annexed, part
     2007 of the Northside Annexation, as I-2.
14-  7-   Rezoning certain property, Richland County Parcel ## 0163222518000,
2007 16-  0178021018000, 0178021017000, 0178021016000, 0178021015000, on East Main
     2007 Street from R-2 to R-2A.
7-   3-2- Correcting a zoning map error: All properties at 27 Ryan Road owned by the
2009 2009 Board of Education of the Pioneer Career and Technology Center to be placed
          in the OS-1 Office Service District.
14-  6-   Rezoning certain property, Richland County Permanent Parcel ##
2009 15-  01780213963000, 0178023965000, 0178023964000, 0178021505001, 0178021505004,
     2009 0178021505005, 0178021505003, 0178021505002 from R-1 to R-1A.
 
(1996 Code, TSO I)
 
13-  8-2- Rezoning Permanent Parcel # 0460822322000 on North Gamble Street - State Route
2010 2010 61 from B-1 to B-3.
23-  9-   Rezoning certain property, Richland County Permanent Parcel ## 0460815915000,
2011 19-  0460815913000, 0460818611000, 0460818614000, 0460818613000, 0460806407000,
     2011 0460818612000, 0460815914000, 0460815917000 and 0490818610000 from I-2 to B-2.
          Rezoning the following Permanent Parcel Numbers on Mohican Street, West Main
          Street,  Blackfork Street and Blackfork Circle which are designated as B-2 to
          CD:

          0460808806000, 2-6 Mohican Street;
          0460809016000, 8 Mohican Street;
          0460815301000, Roush Park;
          0460818108000, 23 West Main Street;
          0460850002000, Old Shelby Court;
          0460850076000, Old Shelby Court;
          0460850078000, Mini Park;
          0460850075000, Old Shelby Police Station;
          0460850137000, Old Shelby Police Station;
          0460818515000, Old Shelby Police Station;
          0460809514000, 23 Blackfork Street;
          0460808917000, 25 Blackfork Street;
5-   6-4- 0460820113000, 27 Blackfork Street,
2012 2012 0460814007000, 29 Blackfork Street; 
          0460809102000, 32 Blackfork Street;
          0460801208000, 34 Blackfork Street;
          0460813213000, 36 Blackfork Street;
          0460813212000, 36 Blackfork Street;
          0460850003000, Old Parking Lot;
          0460802218000, 20 Blackfork Street;
          0460815314000, 22 Blackfork Street;
          0460813518000, 26 Blackfork Street;
          0460806018000, 28 Blackfork Street;
          0460803312000, 30 Blackfork Street;
          0460801810000, 46½ West Main Street;
          0460800701000, 44 West Main Street;
          0460802216000, 1 Blackfork Circle;
          0460801904000, 3 Blackfork Circle;
          0460801807000, 3 Blackfork Circle;
          0460801808000, 5 Blackfork Circle.
19-  9-   Rezoning a portion of Permanent Parcel #0178022318000 on Mansfield Avenue
2012 17-  which is designated as R1-A to B-3.
     2012
30-  1-7- Correcting the official Zoning Districts Map of the city to place the
2012 2013 properties located at 65 North Gamble Street, 67 North Gamble Street and 69
          North Gamble Street in the B-3 Highway Service Business District.
7-   7-   Changing Permanent Parcel #0460850012000 and #0460850144000 from R-1A to B-2;
2018 16-  changing Permanent Parcel #0460818609000 from B-2 to CD.
     2018
26-  1-7- Correcting an error on the Shelby Zoning District Map to place the property
2018 2019 located at 100 North Gamble Street in the B-3 Highway Service Business
          District.
18-  8-5- Changing Permanent Parcel #0178021505031 from R-1A to R-2.
2019 2019
36-  12-  Changing 210 North Gamble Street, 212 North Gamble Street and 214 North Gamble
2019 16-  Street from B-3 to I-2.
     2019
         
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Prior Codes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
 
R.C. Cite 2009 Code Section
1.01               202.01
1.02               202.02
1.05               202.02
1.14               202.03
1.15               202.03
1.23               202.05
1.42               202.03
1.43               202.03
1.44               202.02
1.45               202.03
1.46               202.06
1.47               202.07
1.48               202.07
1.49               202.07
1.50               202.07
1.51               202.06
1.52               202.06
1.55               202.05
1.57               202.04
1.58               202.04
1.59               202.02
701.01             202.02
723.011            660.05
901.51             642.04
901.99(A)          642.04
925.62             618.06
925.99(B)          618.06
955.10             618.095
955.21             618.08
955.24             618.09
955.25             618.10
                   618.09,
955.99(B)          618.095,
                   618.10
955.99(E)          618.08
959.01             618.02
959.02             618.03
959.03             618.04
959.13             618.05
959.131            618.05
959.15             618.16
959.99(B)          618.03
959.99(C)          618.04,
                   618.16
959.99(D)          618.05
959.99(E)          618.05
959.99(E)(2)       618.02
1349.17            672.11
1349.99            672.11
Title XXIX         606.06
2901.01            606.01
2901.02            606.01
2901.03            606.03
2901.04            606.04
2901.09            606.13
2901.11            606.05
2901.13            606.06
2901.21            606.07
2901.22            606.08
2901.23            606.09
2901.24            606.10
2903.05            636.01
2903.06            434.10
2903.09            636.00
2903.10            636.24
2903.13            636.02
2903.14            636.03
2903.16            636.24
2903.21            636.04
2903.211           636.05
2903.22            636.06
2903.31            636.20
2905.03            636.07
2905.05            636.09
2905.12            636.10
2907.01            666.01
2907.04            666.02
2907.06            666.03
2907.08            666.05
2907.09            666.06
2907.10            666.04
2907.23            666.07
2907.24            666.08
2907.241           666.085
2907.25            666.09
2907.26            666.10
2907.31            666.11
2907.33            666.13
2907.35            666.14
2907.36            666.15
2907.37            666.16
2907.38            666.17
2907.39            666.18
2907.40            666.19
2909.01            642.01
2909.03            642.06
2909.06            642.08
2909.07            642.09
2909.08(A)-(E)     678.11
2909.09            642.08
2909.11(B)-(D)     642.07
2909.31            608.18
2911.21            642.10
2911.211           642.11
2911.23            642.10
2911.32            672.05
2913.01            642.01
2913.02            672.01
2913.03            672.08
2913.04            642.03
2913.07            672.23
2913.11            672.09
2913.21            672.10
2913.31(B)         672.12
2913.31(C)(2)      672.12
2913.32            672.125
2913.33            672.13
2913.40            672.19
2913.401           672.19
2913.41            672.14
2913.42            672.15
2913.43            672.16
2913.44            672.17
2913.441           608.15
2913.45            672.18
2913.47            672.20
2913.48            672.21
2913.51            672.02
2913.61(B)-(E)     672.03
2913.71            672.04
2913.72            672.045
2915.01            630.01
2915.02            630.02
2915.03            630.03
2915.04            630.04
2915.05            630.05
2915.06            630.14
2915.09            630.06
2915.091           630.10
2915.092           630.11
2915.093           630.12
2915.094           630.13
2915.10            630.07
2915.11            630.08
2915.12            630.09
2915.13            630.12
2917.01            648.09
2917.03            648.01
2917.031           648.01
2917.04            648.02
2917.05            648.03
2917.11            648.04
2917.12            648.05
2917.13            648.06
2917.21            636.16
2917.31            648.07
2917.32            648.08
2917.40            636.19
2917.41            672.06
2919.18            636.25
2919.21            636.11
2919.22(A)-(E)     636.12
2919.22(H)         636.12
2919.23            636.13
2919.24            636.14
2919.25            636.18
2919.27            636.05
2921.01            606.01
2921.13            608.01
2921.14            608.02
2921.21            608.03
2921.22            608.04
2921.23            608.05
2921.29            608.18
2921.31            608.06
2921.32            608.07
2921.321           642.12
2921.33            608.08
2921.331(A)-(C)    608.09
2921.331(E)        608.09
2921.331(F)        608.09
2921.36            612.09
2921.42            608.10
2921.43            608.11
2921.44            608.12
2921.45            608.13
2921.51            608.14
2921.52(A)-(D)     608.145
2923.02            606.11
2923.03            606.12
2923.11            678.01,
                   678.10
2923.12            678.02
2923.1211(B)       678.15
2923.1211(C)       678.15
2923.1212          678.15
2923.122(C)-(G)    678.14
2923.126           678.15
2923.131           678.025
2923.15            678.03
2923.16            678.04
2923.162           678.095
2923.18            678.05
2923.19            678.06
2923.20            678.07
2923.201           678.16
2923.211           678.085
2923.24            678.12
2925.01            624.01
2925.03            624.02
2925.04            624.025
2925.12            624.04
2925.13            624.05
2925.14            624.06
2925.31            624.07
2925.32(B)(4)      624.073
2925.32(D)(2)      624.073
2925.32(F)         624.073
2925.32(G)         624.073
2925.33            624.076
2925.36            624.08
2925.37(A)         624.09
2925.37(G)         624.09
2925.37(M)         624.09
2925.50            624.13
2925.51            624.12
2925.511           624.12
2925.55            624.15
2925.56            624.15
2925.57            624.15
2925.58            624.15
2927.02            636.20
2927.021           636.20
2927.022           636.20
2927.023           636.20
2927.03            636.23
2927.11            642.05
2927.12            636.22
2927.15            636.26
2927.21            618.15
2929.21            698.02
2929.22            698.03
2929.23            666.99
2929.24            698.02
2929.25            698.02
2929.26            698.02
2929.27            698.02
2929.28            698.02
2929.31            698.04
2929.41            698.05
2933.41            608.16
2935.041           608.17
2935.36(E)         698.01
2981.07            672.24
3701.81            660.02
3701.82            660.01
3701.99(B)         660.01
3701.99(C)         660.02
3715.05            624.15
3715.06            624.15
3716.11            636.17
3716.99(C)         636.17
3719.01            624.01
3719.011           624.01
3719.013           624.01
3719.08(A)         624.10
3719.08(E)         624.10
3719.172(A)        624.11
3719.172(B)        624.11
3719.19            624.13
3719.99(C)         624.10
3719.99(E)         624.11
3737.34            1610.04
3737.51(A)         1610.05
3737.51(B) to (H)  1610.99
3737.61            1610.06
3737.62            1610.07
3737.63            1610.08
3737.64            1610.09
3737.65(A)         1610.10
3737.65(B)         1610.10
3737.99(B)         1610.99
3737.99(C)         1610.99
3737.99(D)         1610.99
3737.99(E)         1610.99
3743.01            678.10
3743.54            678.10
3743.60(E)-(J)     678.10
3743.61(E)-(J)     678.10
3743.63            678.10
3743.64            678.10
3743.65(A)-(E)     678.10
3743.66            678.10
3743.68(B)         678.10
3743.80            678.10
3743.99(C)         678.10
3743.99(D)         678.10
3767.13            660.04
3767.29            660.06
3767.99(B)         660.06
3767.99(C)         660.04
3781.11(B)         1420.07,
                   1610.12
3781.55            666.06
3791.01            1420.04
3791.02            1420.04
3791.03            1420.04
3791.031           660.13
3791.04            1420.04
4301.01            612.01
4301.22(A)(2)      612.10
4301.22(B)         612.03
4301.62            612.07
4301.63            612.02
4301.631           612.10
4301.633           612.02
4301.634           612.02
4301.637           612.06
4301.64            612.04
4301.65            612.12
4301.69            612.02
4301.70            612.06
4301.99(A)         612.06,
                   612.07
4301.99(B)         612.04,
                   612.10
4301.99(C)         612.02
4301.99(D)         612.03
4301.99(E)         612.02,
                   612.10
4301.99(F)         612.02
4301.99(H)         612.03
4301.99(I)         612.02
4301.99(J)         612.12
4303.202(B)        612.08
4303.208(C)        612.08
4303.25            612.05
4303.99(D)         612.08
4501.01(LL)        402.01
4501.01(TT)        416.12
4503.11(A)         436.09
4503.11(D)         436.09
4503.21(A)         436.09
4503.21(B)         436.09
4505.18            436.08
4506.01            442.01
4506.011           442.02
4506.04(A)         442.03
4506.04(B)         442.03
4506.04(C)         442.03
4506.10(A)         442.04
4506.10(E)         442.04
4506.12(E)         442.03
4506.12(F)         442.03
4506.15            442.05
4506.19            442.06
4506.20            442.07
4506.23            442.08
4507.02(A)(1)      436.01
4507.02(A)(2)      436.02
4507.03            436.01
4507.04            436.01
4507.05(F)         436.03
4507.05(I)         436.03
4507.071(B)-(J)    436.035
4507.30            436.04
4507.35            436.06
4507.99            436.02
4509.102           608.01
4510.037(J)        436.071
                   436.071,
4510.04            436.073–
                   436.075
4510.05            408.03,
                   698.07
4510.11            436.071
4510.111           436.071
4510.12            436.072
4510.14            436.073
4510.16            436.074
4510.21            436.075
4510.44            434.011
4511.01            402.01
4511.03            432.19
4511.031           414.10
4511.04            404.03
4511.041           404.04
4511.042           404.04
4511.05            404.05
4511.051           412.05
4511.094           414.11
4511.12(A)         414.01
4511.12(B)         414.01
4511.121(A)-(C)    414.01
4511.121(D)        414.01
4511.121(E)        414.01
4511.13            414.03
4511.131           414.04
4511.132           432.16
4511.14            414.05
4511.15            414.06
4511.16            414.07
4511.17            414.08
4511.18            414.09
4511.181           434.01
4511.19(A)-(F)     434.01
4511.19(G)-(M)     434.01
4511.191(A)        434.01
4511.191(D)        434.01
4511.192           434.01
4511.194           434.01
4511.20            434.02
4511.201           434.02
4511.202           434.08
4511.203           436.05
4511.211           434.04
4511.213           432.205
4511.22            434.05
4511.23            434.06
4511.24            434.07
4511.25            432.01
4511.251           434.09
4511.26            432.02
4511.27            432.03
4511.28            432.04
4511.29            432.05
4511.30            432.06
4511.31            432.07
4511.32            432.30
4511.33            432.08
4511.34            432.09
4511.35            432.32
4511.36            432.10
4511.37            432.11
4511.38            432.12
4511.39            432.13
4511.40            432.14
4511.41            432.15
4511.42            432.17
4511.43            432.18
4511.431(A)        432.21
4511.431(B)        432.21
4511.432           432.22
4511.44            432.21
4511.441           416.09
4511.45            432.20
4511.451           432.23
4511.452           416.08
4511.46            416.01
4511.47            416.02
4511.48            416.03
4511.481           416.10
4511.49            416.04
4511.491           416.11
4511.50            416.05
4511.51            416.06
4511.511           416.07
4511.512           416.12
4511.52            444.01
4511.521           444.11
4511.53            444.02
4511.54            444.03
4511.55            444.04
4511.56            444.05
4511.60            432.29
4511.61            432.34
4511.62            432.33
4511.63            432.34
4511.64            432.35
4511.65            414.02
4511.66            452.01
4511.661           452.07
4511.67            452.02
4511.68            452.03
4511.681           452.06
4511.68(A)(1)-(13) 452.03
4511.68(A)(15)     452.03
4511.68(A)(16)     452.03
4511.69            452.04
4511.70            432.25,
                   452.08
4511.701           440.08
4511.71            432.26
4511.711           432.24
4511.712           432.36
4511.713(A)        432.41
4511.713(B)        432.41
4511.72            432.27
4511.73            432.28
4511.75            432.32
4511.79            442.09
4511.81(A)-(G)     438.29
4511.81(J)         438.29
4511.82            432.42
4511.84            432.43
4511.85            440.11
4511.99            408.02
4513.02(A)         438.01
4513.02(H)         438.01
4513.021           438.27
4513.03            438.02
4513.04            438.03
4513.05            438.04
4513.06            438.05
4513.07            438.06
4513.071           438.26
4513.08            438.07
4513.09            438.08
4513.10            438.09
4513.11            438.10
4513.111           438.10
4513.12            438.11
4513.13            438.12
4513.14            438.13
4513.15            438.14
4513.16            438.15
4513.17            438.16
4513.171           438.165
4513.182           438.17
4513.19            438.18
4513.20            438.19
4513.21            438.20
4513.22            438.21
4513.23            438.22
4513.24            438.23
4513.241(C)-(I)    438.24
4513.241(J)        438.24
4513.263           438.30
4513.29            440.04
4513.30            438.25
4513.31            440.06
4513.32            440.05
4513.34            440.01
4513.36            404.02
4513.361           404.09
4513.60            452.05,
                   452.06
4513.61            452.05
4513.64            452.05
4513.65            660.07
                   438.02–
                   438.16,
                   438.165,
4513.99            438.17–
                   438.26,
                   440.01,
                   440.04–
                   440.06
4519.01            446.01
4519.02            446.08
4519.20            446.02
4519.40            446.03
4519.41            446.04
4519.44            446.05
4519.46            446.06
4519.48            446.07
4519.66            446.09
4549.02            436.10
4549.021           436.12
4549.03            436.13
4549.05            404.01
4549.08            436.10
4549.081(B)        414.01
4549.081(C)        414.01
4549.11(A)         436.09
4549.11(B)         436.09
4549.12(A)         436.09
4549.12(B)         436.09
4549.20            438.32
4729.01            624.01
4931.31            636.16
4931.40(A)         608.19
4931.49(D)-(F)     608.19
4931.99(A)         608.19
4931.99(B)         636.16
4931.99(C)         608.19
4933.18            672.06
4933.19            672.06
5577.05            440.02
5577.06            440.02
5577.11            440.03
5577.15            440.05
5577.99(C)         440.02
5577.99(E)         440.03
5589.08            440.07
5589.081           440.07
5589.12            642.02
5589.99(B)         440.07,
                   642.02
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODES
 
1923 Code 2009 Code Section
1   206.01
2   206.02
5   276.02
16  238.02
49  642.14(a)
52  234.01(a)
53  234.01(b)
54  234.01(c)
55  234.01(d)
102 1024.04
110 1020.01
134 276.02
135 276.03
137 1474.01
138 1474.02
139 1474.03
140 1474.04
141 1474.05
142 1474.06
143 1474.07
144 1474.08
176 412.06
190 1022.01
199 1476.01
201 1476.02
203 1476.03
205 660.10(a), (b)
 
 
1986 Code 2009 Code Section
311.02    412.07
331.36    432.36
333.09    434.025
337.25    438.28
505.02    618.14
505.10    618.11(a)
505.14    618.16
505.16    618.11(b), (c)
505.18    618.18
505.19    618.19
509.09    648.10
521.04    660.10(e) to (g)
521.13    660.11(b)
521.14    660.15
529.09(b) 612.11(b)
531.02    648.11
541.09(b) 642.14(b)
541.10    642.13
557.01    1026.03
557.03    1026.04
725.99    840.99
729.12    850.12
729.99    850.99
905.99    1020.99
913.05    1024.05
913.06    1024.06
975.08(c) 1062.08(c)
975.99    1062.99
1357.99   1474.99
1361.99   1476.99
1365.99   1480.99
1373.99   1492.99
 
 
1996 Code 2009 Code Section
230.02  230.01
230.03  230.02
260.27  260.26
260.28  260.27
402.02  402.01
402.03  402.01
402.04  402.01
402.05  402.01
402.06  402.01
402.07  402.01
402.08  402.01
402.09  402.01
402.10  402.01
402.11  402.01
402.12  402.01
402.13  402.01
402.14  402.01
402.15  402.01
402.16  402.01
402.17  402.01
402.18  402.01
402.185 402.01
402.19  402.01
402.20  402.01
402.21  402.01
402.22  402.01
402.23  402.01
402.24  402.01
402.25  402.01
402.255 402.01
402.26  402.01
402.27  402.01
402.28  402.01
402.29  402.01
402.30  402.01
402.305 402.01
402.31  402.01
402.32  402.01
402.33  402.01
402.34  402.01
402.35  402.01
402.36  402.01
402.37  402.01
402.38  402.01
402.39  402.01
402.395 402.01
402.40  402.01
402.41  402.01
402.42  402.01
402.43  402.01
402.44  402.01
402.45  402.01
402.46  402.01
402.47  402.01
402.48  402.01
402.49  402.01
402.50  402.01
402.51  402.01
402.52  402.01
402.53  402.01
402.54  402.01
402.55  402.01
402.56  402.01
402.57  402.01
438.32  438.32
636.09  636.09
636.10  636.10
636.11  636.11
636.12  636.12
636.13  636.13
636.14  636.14
636.16  636.16
636.17  636.17
636.18  636.18
636.19  636.19
636.20  636.20
636.21  636.20
636.22  636.22
636.23  636.23
636.24  636.24
636.25  636.25
648.17  648.17
666.06  666.06
672.23  672.23
698.07  698.07
TSO A   TSO I
TSO B   TSO II
TSO C   TSO III
TSO D   TSO IV
TSO E   TSO V
TSO F   TSO VI
TSO G   TSO VII
TSO H   TSO VIII
TSO I   TSO IX
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
(-; Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 110) 4-19-1899  TSO I
35-69                           - -        TSO V
53-56                           Uncertain  TSO II
18-56                           4-2-1956   TSO VIII
32-56                           6-18-1956  TSO II
52-56                           10-15-1956 TSO II
14-57                           3-4-1957   TSO II
18-57                           4-1-1957   TSO II
80-57                           12-2-1957  TSO VI
10-60                           2-11-1960  TSO II
16-60                           4-4-1960   TSO II
40-60                           11-7-1960  TSO VI
8-64                            2-3-1963   TSO V
12-63                           3-5-1963   TSO II
38-64                           7-20-1964  TSO VI
15-65                           5-3-1965   TSO VI
33-66                           8-15-1966  TSO IV
9-68                            2-19-1968  TSO VI
18-68                           4-1-1968   240.02
34-68                           7-9-1968   TSO V
46-68                           8-19-1968  TSO II
3-69                            l-20-1969  TSO VI
26-69                           5-19-1969  TSO II
29-69                           6-2-1969   TSO V
42-69                           8-4-1969   TSO VI
53-70                           12-7-1970  TSO I
7-71                            4-5-1971   234.03
27-71                           7-19-1971  TSO II
29-71                           7-19-1971  TSO II
82-74                           12-16-1974 TSO V
34-76                           5-3-1976   TSO IV
43-76                           5-17-1976  TSO V
66-76                           7-19-1976  TSO II
79-76                           9-7-1976   TSO II
83-76                           10-4-1976  TSO II
37-77                           5-2-1977   TSO IV
70-77                           8-15-1977  TSO VI
89-77                           10-3-1977  TSO II
90-77                           10-3-1977  TSO V
96-77                           11-7-1977  TSO II
6-78                            1-16-1978  TSO V
55-78                           4-17-1978  TSO V
71-78                           6-5-1978   TSO V
80-78                           7-17-1978  TSO IV
112-78                          11-20-1978 TSO II
6-79                            1-15-1979  TSO II
43-79                           8-6-1979   TSO VIII
4-80                            1-21-1980  TSO II
5-80                            1-21-1980  TSO VIII
25-80                           4-7-1980   TSO II
26-80                           4-7-1980   TSO II
38-80                           5-19-1980  TSO II,
                                           TSO V
74-80                           9-15-1980  TSO II
79-80                           10-6-1980  TSO II
80-80                           10-6-1980  TSO II
34-81                           6-1-1981   TSO II
35-81                           6-1-1981   TSO II
37-81                           6-15-1981  TSO VIII
50-81                           8-17-1981  TSO II
11-82                           3-1-1982   TSO II
28-82                           6-21-1982  TSO II
50-82                           10-4-1982  TSO II
51-82                           10-4-1982  TSO II
23-83                           5-2-1983   TSO VI
71-83                           12-19-1983 TSO VIII
38-84                           8-6-1984   230.01
46-84                           9-17-1984  TSO VIII
3-85                            1-21-1985  282.06
56-85                           9-16-1985  TSO VI
68-85                           11-18-1985 TSO VIII
26-87                           4-6-1987   TSO V
52-87                           6-1-1987   TSO VIII
30-91                           7-15-1991  TSO V
31-91                           7-15-1991  TSO V
32-91                           7-15-1991  TSO V
38-91                           8-5-1991   TSO V
35-92                           7-6-1992   TSO V
36-93                           6-7-1993   TSO VIII
44-93                           8-16-1993  TSO V
62-93                           12-6-1993  TSO VIII
53-94                           11-7-1994  TSO III
4-95                            2-6-1995   TSO VIII
14-95                           4-3-1995   TSO IV
32-96                           5-20-1996  TSO II
62-96                           11-4-1996  TSO II
63-96                           11-4-1996  TSO II
25-98                           5-4-1998   TSO VIII
32-99                           6-7-1999   TSO VIII
65-99                           8-16-1999  TSO VIII
84-99                           11-15-1999 TSO VII
94-99                           12-20-1999 TSO VIII
8-2000                          2-8-2000   TSO VI
25-2000                         4-3-2000   246.07
32-2000                         4-17-2000  TSO II
66-2000                         9-5-2000   TSO II,
                                           TSO V
76-2000                         10-2-2000  TSO II
77-2000                         10-2-2000  TSO II
81-2000                         11-20-2000 TSO III
90-2000                         12-4-2000  TSO III
94-2000                         12-18-2000 TSO V
16-2001                         2-5-2001   TSO VII
17-2001                         2-5-2001   TSO V
27-2001                         2-20-2001  TSO V
45-2001                         4-16-2001  TSO VIII
83-2001                         10-1-2001  TSO VIII
1-2002                          1-7-2002   TSO IX
3-2002                          1-7-2002   TSO III
4-2002                          1-7-2002   TSO III
5-2002                          1-7-2002   TSO III
11-2002                         1-22-2002  TSO III
21-2002                         3-19-2002  TSO VIII
25-2002                         4-15-2002  TSO VIII
54-2002                         9-16-2002  TSO I
6-2003                          2-3-2003   TSO II
7-2003                          2-3-2003   TSO V
10-2003                         2-18-2003  TSO II
18-2003                         4-7-2003   TSO V
2-2004                          1-5-2004   TSO II
17-2004                         4-5-2004   TSO II
18-2004                         4-5-2004   TSO II
28-2004                         5-17-2004  TSO III
30-2004                         5-17-2004  TSO III
44-2004                         7-6-2004   TSO II
46-2004                         8-16-2004  TSO V
53-2004                         9-7-2004   TSO II
59-2004                         10-4-2004  TSO II
64-2004                         10-22-2004 TSO VIII
26-2005                         5-16-2005  TSO III
38-2005                         8-1-2005   TSO V
55-2005                         11-21-2005 TSO II
9-2006                          1-17-2006  TSO VIII
23-2006                         5-1-2006   TSO VIII
30-2006                         7-3-2006   TSO VIII
48-2006                         10-16-2006 TSO II
6-2007                          1-22-2007  TSO VIII
                                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
(Ord. Book 1, p. 52; Rev. Ord. Sec. 70)  Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 1, pp. 60, 55, 71; Rev. Ord.  Uncertain           TSO VII
Sec. 63)
(Ord. Book 1, p. 63; Rev. Ord. Sec. 64)  Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 1, p. 85; Rev. Ord. Sec. 59)  Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 1, p. 167; Rev. Ord., p. 126) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1, p. 168; Rev. Ord.          3-2-1887            TSO IV
Appendix, p. 126)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 67; Rev. Ord., p. 126)  Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 111)                    Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 143; Rev. Ord. Sec. 73) Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 150)                    Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 160)                    Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 160; Rev. Ord., p. 126) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 224; Rev. Ord., p. 127) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 240)                    Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 245; Rev. Ord. Sec. 71) Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 245; Rev. Ord. Sec. 72) Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 256; Rev. Ord.          Uncertain           TSO VIII
Appendix, p. 124)
(Ord. Book 2, p. 109)                    Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Ord. Book 2, p. 269; Rev. Ord., p. 126) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 270; Rev. Ord., p. 126) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 271; Rev. Ord., p. 126) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 2, p. 524; Rev. Ord., p. 127) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 3, p. 8; Rev. Ord. Sec. 62)   Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 3, p. 9; Rev. Ord. Sec. 74)   Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 3, p. 77; Rev. Ord. Sec. 60)  Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 3, p. 189; Rev. Ord., p. 127) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 3, p. 205; Rev. Ord.          Uncertain           TSO I
Appendix, p. 105)
(Ord. Book 3, p. 239; Rev. Ord. Sec. 75) Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 3, p. 415; Rev. Ord.,p. 127)  Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 3, p. 524; Rev. Ord. Sec. 76) Uncertain           TSO VII
(Ord. Book 3, p. 547; Rev. Ord., p. 127) Uncertain           TSO III
(Ord. Book 3, p. 548; Rev. Ord.          Uncertain           TSO VIII
Appendix, p. 124)
(Ord. Book 3, p. 570; Rev. Ord., p. 127) Uncertain           TSO III
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 61)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 65)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Ord. Secs. 69, 79)            Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 77)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 80)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 81)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 82)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 83)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 84)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 85)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 86)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 87)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 92)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 93)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 94)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 95)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 96)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 98)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 99)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 88)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 90)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 97)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 99)                      Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 100)                     Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101)                     Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101A)                    Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Sec. 101B)                    Uncertain           TSO VII
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 124)             Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 124)             Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 124)             Uncertain           TSO VIII
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 125)             Uncertain           TSO VIII
318                                      Uncertain           TSO I
331                                      Uncertain           TSO I
371                                      Uncertain           TSO VII
8                                        Uncertain           TSO I
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 66)             10-5-1887           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 106)            9-13-1890           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 122)            7-27-1892           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)            7-21-1897           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)            7-21-1897           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 269)            7-21-1897           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 271)            8-18-1897           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1884-1898, p. 270)            8-18-1897           TSO III
(page 3)                                 7-20-1898           TSO III
(page 3)                                 7-20-1898           TSO III
(page 3)                                 8-17-1898           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 189)            8-1-1900            TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 490)            9-7-1904            TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 415)            6-27-1906           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 523)            7-28-1908           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 524)            4-6-1910            TSO III
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 547)            8-16-1910           TSO III
(Ord. Book 3, p. 548; Rev. Ord.          8-16-1910           TSO VIII
Appendix, p. 124)
(Ord. Book 1898-1912, p. 570)            6-23-1911           TSO III
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 116)             12-10-1912          TSO I
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 148; Rev.       11-19-1913          TSO III
Ord.,p. 126)
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)            11-6-1916           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)            11-6-1916           TSO III
(Ord. Book 1913-1916, p. 373)            11-6-1916           TSO III
(Rev. Ord. Appendix, p. 117)             6-18-1917           TSO I
(Rev. Ord. p. 128)                       4-4-1921            TSO III
1921 Charter                             -                   Charter
11                                       12-11-1922          222.01
20                                       5-28-1923           TSO I
21                                       5-28-1923           TSO I
22                                       6-18-1923           TSO I
23                                       6-18-1923           TSO VII
35                                       12-10-1923          TSO III
62                                       11-14-1924          274.01
99                                       6-7-1926            TSO VII
106                                      8-23-1926           TSO VII
124                                      2-7-1927            TSO VIII
125                                      2-21-1927           TSO VII
127                                      3-7-1927            TSO VII
131                                      4-4-1927            TSO VII
140                                      6-6-1927            TSO I
157                                      10-3-1927           TSO IV
161                                      1-16-1928           TSO V
169                                      4-2-1928            TSO VII
176                                      6-18-1928           TSO VII
177                                      7-2-1928            TSO VIII
179                                      7-2-1928            660.10
189                                      1-21-1929           TSO VIII
193                                      3-2-1929            TSO VII
195                                      4-5-1929            TSO I
203                                      7-1-1929            TSO VII
204                                      8-5-1929            TSO VII
220                                      10-21-1929          TSO VII
222                                      11-18-1929          TSO VIII
                                                             412.04,
247                                      10-20-1930          452.10,
                                                             452.12
278                                      2-15-1932           TSO VII
289                                      7-5-1932            TSO III
317                                      11-20-1933          TSO I,
                                                             TSO V
338                                      5-7-1934            TSO IV
363                                      3-4-1935            TSO VII
365                                      3-18-1935           TSO VII
378                                      8-19-1935           1062.01–
                                                             1062.06
379                                      9-16-1935           TSO VII
380                                      9-16-1935           TSO VII
424                                      3-1-1937            234.02
425                                      3-15-1937           TSO VII
426                                      3-15-1937           TSO VII
428A                                     4-5-1937            TSO VIII
531                                      10-2-1937           TSO V
514                                      5-15-1939           TSO V
526                                      8-24-1939           TSO IV
533                                      10-18-1939          TSO IV
15-41                                    6-16-1941           TSO VIII
2-43                                     1-18-1943           1492.02
7-43                                     4-19-1943           TSO III
17-43                                    9-7-1943            TSO III
20-43                                    11-1-1943           TSO III
6-44                                     2-21-1944           TSO VIII
10-44                                    8-21-1944           TSO V
10-45                                    5-7-1945            TSO VII
18-45                                    10-1-1945           TSO VIII
20-45                                    10-15-1945          TSO III
26-45                                    12-3-1945           TSO VIII
2-46                                     1-21-1946           TSO III
25-46                                    9-16-1946           TSO VIII
27-46                                    10-7-1946           TSO III
8-47                                     3-2-1947            TSO VII
9-47                                     3-17-1947           TSO VIII
                                                             850.01–
                                                             850.07,
34-47                                    10-6-1947           850.09,
                                                             850.11,
                                                             850.13–
                                                             850.16
14-48                                    3-1-1948            TSO VIII
19-48                                    4-5-1948            TSO III
21-48                                    5-6-1948            TSO I
30-48                                    9-20-1948           TSO VIII
10-49                                    2-8-1949            TSO VIII
11-49                                    2-10-1949           TSO VII
19-49                                    5-17-1949           TSO I
12-50                                    6-5-1950            TSO IV
20-51                                    5-21-1951           TSO IV
23-51                                    6-4-1951            TSO IV
33-51                                    10-1-1951           TSO VII
34-51                                    10-1-1951           TSO VII
35-51                                    10-1-1951           TSO VII
36-51                                    10-1-1951           TSO VII
37-51                                    10-1-1951           TSO VII
54-51                                    12-17-1951          TSO IV
13-52                                    4-21-1952           TSO VII
18-52                                    6-2-1952            1024.03,
                                                             1024.07
14-53                                    4-20-1953           TSO VII
21-53                                    5-18-1953           TSO V
22-53                                    5-18-1953           TSO II,
                                                             TSO VI
23-53                                    6-1-1953            TSO VII
37-53                                    8-17-1953           TSO VIII
38-53                                    8-17-1953           TSO VIII
40-53                                    9-8-1953            TSO VII
45-53                                    9-21-1953           1020.02,
                                                             TSO VII
14-54                                    8-16-1954           TSO III
15-54                                    9-7-1954            TSO VIII
20-54                                    10-4-1954           TSO III
21-54                                    10-4-1954           TSO VII
27-54                                    12-5-1954           TSO VII
31-54                                    12-16-1954          TSO V
23-54                                    12-20-1954          TSO VIII
6-55                                     3-21-1955           TSO VIII
11-55                                    6-6-1955            TSO VIII
14-55                                    6-20-1955           TSO V
20-55                                    8-15-1955           TSO III
26-55                                    10-17-1955          TSO VIII
2-56                                     1-16-1956           TSO VIII
4-56                                     2-6-1956            TSO VIII
5-56                                     2-20-1956           TSO VII
32-56                                    3-4-1956            TSO VIII
9-56                                     4-2-1956            TSO VIII
14-56                                    5-21-1956           TSO V
23-56                                    7-2-1956            TSO VIII
30-56                                    8-9-1956            TSO III
31-56                                    9-4-1956            TSO I
34-56                                    10-1-1956           TSO V
36-56                                    11-5-1956           TSO IV
37-56                                    11-5-1956           TSO VI
39-56                                    12-3-1956           TSO VI
33-56                                    3-4-1957            TSO VIII
14-57                                    4-1-1957            1022.02
15-57                                    4-1-1957            TSO III
18-57                                    4-15-1957           TSO III
28-57                                    6-17-1957           TSO VIII
44-57                                    8-5-1957            TSO VIII
48-57                                    9-3-1957            TSO III
49-57                                    9-3-1957            TSO IV
67-57                                    12-16-1957          404.07
68-57                                    12-16-1957          TSO III
69-57                                    12-16-1957          TSO III
14-58                                    2-17-1958           TSO IV,
                                                             TSO VII
20-58                                    4-7-1958            TSO VIII
24-58                                    4-21-1958           TSO V
41-58                                    8-4-1958            TSO IV
42-58                                    8-4-1958            TSO VIII
44-58                                    9-2-1958            TSO VII
8-59                                     2-16-1959           278.01–
                                                             278.03
20-59                                    8-3-1959            TSO VII
24-59                                    8-17-1959           TSO III
3-60                                     2-15-1960           TSO I
6-60                                     3-7-1960            TSO III
9-60                                     4-18-1960           TSO IV
12-60                                    5-16-1960           TSO II
14-60                                    6-6-1960            TSO VII
25-60                                    8-15-1960           TSO II
27-60                                    9-6-1960            TSO II
28-60                                    9-19-1960           TSO II
35-60                                    12-5-1960           TSO IV
1-61                                     1-3-1961            TSO V
5-61                                     2-6-1961            TSO VIII
8-61                                     2-20-1961           TSO II
10-61                                    3-6-1961            TSO II
25-61                                    4-17-1961           TSO III
27-61                                    6-5-1961            TSO IV
32-61                                    7-3-1961            1062.08
39-61                                    8-7-1961            TSO III
45-61                                    11-6-1961           TSO II
9-62                                     5-7-1962            TSO III
15-62                                    6-18-1962           TSO VIII
23-63                                    8-5-1963            TSO VII
26-63                                    9-9-1963            TSO II
27-63                                    9-16-1963           TSO VII
30-63                                    12-2-1963           TSO VIII
31-63                                    12-2-1963           TSO VII
32-63                                    12-2-1963           TSO VII
34-63                                    12-16-1963          TSO VIII
35-63                                    12-16-1963          TSO VIII
36-63                                    12-16-1963          TSO III
1-64                                     1-6-1964            TSO VII
3-64                                     1-6-1964            TSO VIII
8-64                                     5-18-1964           TSO I
11-64                                    6-1-1964            TSO V
17-64                                    8-17-1964           TSO III
19-64                                    9-8-1964            TSO III
23-64                                    11-16-1964          TSO V
12-65                                    3-15-1965           TSO V
14-65                                    4-19-1965           412.04
20-65                                    6-7-1965            TSO IV
23-65                                    7-19-1965           TSO III
24-65                                    7-19-1965           TSO III
25-65                                    8-2-1965            TSO III
36-65                                    10-5-1965           TSO V
39-65                                    11-1-1965           TSO VI
3-66                                     2-21-1966           TSO VIII
7-66                                     4-4-1966            TSO IV
12-66                                    6-6-1966            TSO IV
13-66                                    6-20-1966           TSO VIII
14-66                                    6-20-1966           TSO IV
15-66                                    6-20-1966           TSO VIII
9-66                                     7-18-1966           TSO IV
16-66                                    8-5-1966            TSO VIII
18-66                                    9-6-1966            TSO VIII
21-66                                    10-3-1966           TSO IV
36-66                                    12-5-1966           TSO V
41-66                                    12-19-1966          TSO IV
6-67                                     4-3-1967            TSO VIII
10-67                                    6-5-1967            TSO I
11-67                                    6-19-1967           TSO VIII
12-67                                    8-7-1967            612.11
13-67                                    8-7-1967            TSO IV
23-67                                    9-18-1967           TSO IV
25-67                                    10-2-1967           TSO VIII
7-68                                     3-4-1968            TSO VIII
10-68                                    3-18-1968           TSO II,
                                                             TSO IV
968                                      3-18-1968           TSO VI
14-68                                    4-1-1968            TSO III
18-68                                    8-5-1968            TSO I
31-68                                    11-4-1968           TSO III
7-69                                     4-21-1969           TSO III
8-69                                     4-21-1969           TSO III
18-69                                    7-7-1969            TSO VIII
20-69                                    7-22-1969           TSO VIII
31-69                                    10-6-1969           TSO III
39-69                                    11-3-1969           TSO VIII
40-69                                    11-3-1969           TSO VIII
44-69                                    12-15-1969          TSO V,
                                                             TSO VI
6-70                                     2-2-1970            TSO VIII
7-70                                     2-16-1970           1442.03
17-70                                    5-4-1970            TSO III
29-70                                    7-20-1970           TSO III
15-69                                    8-17-1970           TSO VIII
36-70                                    8-17-1970           232.01
21-71                                    8-16-1971           TSO II
22-71                                    9-7-1971            TSO II
26-71                                    10-18-1971          452.14
8-72                                     2-22-1972           TSO II,
                                                             TSO IV
17-72                                    5-15-1972           TSO IV
26-72                                    6-19-1972           TSO IV
36-72                                    9-5-1972            TSO I
45-72                                    9-5-1972            452.13
40-73                                    12-3-1973           TSO V
5-74                                     1-21-1974           TSO VI
                                                             404.07,
                                                             406.03,
7-74                                     2-4-1974            406.05,
                                                             406.09,
                                                             452.03,
                                                             452.10
7-74                                     3-18-1974           TSO I
28-74                                    8-19-1974           1046.01
8-75                                     2-18-1975           TSO VIII
13-75                                    4-21-1975           TSO III
26-75                                    9-15-1975           TSO III
28-75                                    9-15-1975           1042.21
32-75                                    12-1-1975           1042.20
7-76                                     4-5-1976            452.15
23-76                                    6-21-1976           1024.01,
                                                             1024.02
30-76                                    8-2-1976            1066.01,
                                                             1066.02
32-76                                    9-20-1976           TSO III
33-76                                    9-20-1976           TSO III
34-76                                    9-20-1976           TSO III
39-76                                    9-20-1976           TSO VIII
40-76                                    9-22-1976           TSO I
42-76                                    10-4-1976           TSO III
43-76                                    10-4-1976           TSO V
49-76                                    12-6-1976           TSO VIII
52-76                                    1-17-1977           TSO III
17-77                                    5-9-1977            TSO III
                                                             1462.01–
                                                             1462.09,
7-77                                     5-16-1977           1462.12,
                                                             1462.14,
                                                             1462.15,
                                                             1462.99
                                                             1482.01–
                                                             1482.04,
8-77                                     5-16-1977           1482.06,
                                                             1482.08,
                                                             1482.09,
                                                             1482.99
14-77                                    5-16-1977           TSO III
15-77                                    5-16-1977           TSO III
16-77                                    5-19-1977           TSO I
18-77                                    6-6-1977            TSO IV
33-77                                    9-16-1977           TSO VIII
41-77                                    10-17-1977          TSO III
49-77                                    11-21-1977          TSO V
5-78                                     2-27-1978           TSO VIII
12-78                                    6-5-1978            440.12
15-78                                    6-19-1978           TSO VIII
36-78                                    10-16-1978          230.02,
                                                             230.99
31-78                                    11-6-1978           TSO IV
2-79                                     1-2-1979            452.16
1-79                                     2-5-1979            284.01
23-79                                    3-19-1979           TSO I
29-79                                    5-2-1979            TSO IV
32-79                                    5-7-1979            TSO VIII
45-79                                    9-4-1979            1442.04
47-79                                    10-1-1979           TSO IV
53-79                                    10-1-1979           TSO VIII
54-79                                    10-1-1979           TSO VIII
49-79                                    10-15-1979          TSO III
56-79                                    11-19-1979          TSO III
1-80                                     1-28-1980           TSO IV
5-80                                     3-3-1980            TSO V
4-80                                     3-17-1980           1026.02
14-80                                    9-15-1980           TSO III
19-80                                    9-15-1980           1046.02
                                                             1042.04,
                                                             1042.06
                                                             1042.07,
21-80                                    10-6-1980           1042.09–
                                                             1042.11,
                                                             1042.15–
                                                             1042.18
1-81                                     1-5-1981            660.10
4-81                                     1-5-1981            404.07
5-81                                     1-26-1981           TSO II
6-81                                     2-16-1981           TSO VIII
22-81                                    6-15-1981           TSO IV
23-81                                    6-16-1981           TSO VII
24-81                                    6-29-1981           TSO I
22A-81                                   9-8-1981            678.13
23A-81                                   9-8-1981            678.08
27-81                                    11-16-1981          412.01
9-82                                     4-19-1982           1420.99
20-82                                    8-2-1982            1492.01
26-82                                    10-4-1982           TSO III
27-82                                    10-4-1982           TSO III
                                                             852.02,
8-83                                     3-21-1983           852.03,
                                                             852.05,
                                                             852.99
                                                             406.02,
                                                             406.04,
9-83                                     3-21-1983           406.06,
                                                             406.07,
                                                             406.08
                                                             1240.01–
                                                             1240.09,
                                                             1242.01–
                                                             1242.07,
                                                             1242.99,
                                                             1244.01–
17-83                                    6-6-1983            1244.05,
                                                             1246.01–
                                                             1246.04,
                                                             1248.02–
                                                             1248.06,
                                                             1250.01–
                                                             1250.08,
                                                             Subdiv. Appx VII
19-83                                    6-20-1983           TSO III
25-83                                    9-6-1983            TSO IV
32-83                                    10-10-1983          TSO I
38-83                                    12-5-1983           TSO III
2-84                                     3-19-1984           TSO V
15-84                                    5-21-1984           660.03
                                                             1484.01–
14-84                                    6-4-1984            1484.05,
                                                             1484.99
10-84                                    6-18-1984           1424.04
19-84                                    8-6-1984            246.04,
                                                             246.05
25-84                                    8-6-1984            240.03
27-84                                    8-29-1984           238.01
                                                             806.01–
29-84                                    12-3-1984           806.07,
                                                             806.99
35-84                                    1-7-1985            1060.01
                                                             1042.01–
32-84                                    4-15-1985           1042.03,
                                                             1042.12–
                                                             1042.14
11-85                                    6-17-1985           1060.02
24-85                                    10-21-1985          852.04
27-85                                    10-21-1985          248.01,
                                                             248.03
32-85                                    12-16-1985          1442.01
2-86                                     1-6-1986            246.03
3-86                                     1-6-1986            250.01,
                                                             250.03
16-86                                    7-7-1986            236.01
17-86                                    7-7-1986            242.05
22-86                                    9-2-1986            TSO V
26-86                                    9-15-1986           TSO III
27-86                                    9-15-1986           TSO III
                                                             1486.01–
                                                             1486.17,
23-86                                    10-6-1986           1486.99,
                                                             1490.01–
                                                             1490.15
28-86                                    10-20-1986          248.05
31-86                                    11-3-1986           238.03
34-86                                    12-1-1986           884.01–
                                                             884.15
43-86                                    1-19-1987           292.01
9-87                                     5-4-1987            TSO IV
15-87                                    8-3-1987            1472.01–
                                                             1472.07
32-87                                    11-24-1987          854.02
36-87                                    12-7-1987           234.04
37-87                                    1-4-1988            TSO III
                                                             246.03–
                                                             246.05,
3-88                                     3-7-1988            1044.03,
                                                             1044.04,
                                                             1044.06
4-88                                     3-7-1988            248.02,
                                                             248.04
5-88                                     3-7-1988            250.02,
                                                             250.04
11-88                                    4-4-1988            882.01–
                                                             882.03
15-88                                    5-2-1988            TSO III
16-88                                    5-16-1988           234.05
19-88                                    6-20-1988           TSO III
23-88                                    8-15-1988           TSO IV
15-89                                    5-15-1989           242.01
21-89                                    7-17-1989           618.20
26-89                                    12-4-1989           TSO IV
27-89                                    12-4-1989           TSO IV
                                                             1044.01,
4-90                                     4-2-1990            1044.03–
                                                             1044.06,
                                                             1044.99
                                                             282.01–
8-90                                     6-18-1990           282.05,
                                                             1026.01
                                                             1220.01–
                                                             1220.03,
                                                             1260.01–
                                                             1260.09,
                                                             1262.01–
                                                             1262.07,
                                                             1262.09–
                                                             1262.11,
                                                             1262.99,
                                                             1264.01–
                                                             1264.09,
                                                             1266.01–
                                                             1266.13,
                                                             1268.01,
                                                             1268.02,
                                                             1268.04,
                                                             1270.01,
                                                             1270.02,
                                                             1270.04,
                                                             1272.01,
                                                             1272.02,
                                                             1272.04,
                                                             1274.01,
                                                             1274.03,
1-91                                     3-4-1991            1274.04,
                                                             1276.01–
                                                             1276.04,
                                                             1278.01,
                                                             1278.04,
                                                             1280.01–
                                                             1280.03,
                                                             1282.01–
                                                             1282.04,
                                                             1284.01–
                                                             1284.04,
                                                             1286.01–
                                                             1286.04,
                                                             1288.01–
                                                             1288.04,
                                                             1290.01–
                                                             1290.03,
                                                             1292.01–
                                                             1292.05,
                                                             1294.01–
                                                             1294.04,
                                                             1296.01–
                                                             1296.16,
                                                             1298.01–
                                                             1298.09
9-91                                     3-4-1991            238.01
13-91                                    5-6-1991            298.01
15-91                                    6-3-1991            TSO III
21-91                                    10-7-1991           246.01
24-91                                    10-21-1991          TSO III
27-91                                    11-4-1991           TSO IV,
                                                             TSO VII
31-91                                    12-16-1991          238.05
7-92                                     3-16-1992           238.04
8-92                                     4-20-1992           260.04
9-92                                     4-20-1992           TSO IV
                                                             848.01–
14-92                                    7-6-1992            848.06,
                                                             848.99
15-92                                    7-20-1992           TSO IX
16-92                                    7-20-1992           TSO IX
21-92                                    10-5-1992           TSO I
24-92                                    1-4-1993            TSO VII
6-93                                     2-16-1993           660.12
10-93                                    4-19-1993           TSO IX
13-93                                    4-19-1993           TSO IV
15-93                                    5-3-1993            TSO IV
11-93                                    5-17-1993           TSO III
12-93                                    5-17-1993           660.14
17-93                                    6-21-1993           TSO IX
31-93                                    8-2-1993            TSO III
37-93                                    12-6-1993           246.06
13-94                                    5-2-1994            TSO IV
12-94                                    6-6-1994            642.15
14-94                                    6-6-1994            TSO III
19-94                                    9-6-1994            648.12–
                                                             648.15
21-94                                    9-6-1994            TSO VII
28-94                                    11-21-1994          286.02–
                                                             286.05
30-94                                    12-5-1994           TSO II,
                                                             TSO V
2-95                                     2-6-1995            242.03
3-95                                     4-3-1995            TSO III
4-95                                     4-3-1995            TSO IX
8-95                                     5-1-1995            TSO IV
16-95                                    10-2-1995           TSO IV
17-95                                    10-16-1995          TSO IX
                                                             260.07–
                                                             260.09,
                                                             260.14–
20-95                                    11-20-1995          260.16,
                                                             260.18,
                                                             260.20,
                                                             260.21
21-95                                    12-4-1995           1260.09,
                                                             1278.03
1-96                                     2-5-1996            TSO IX
2-96                                     2-5-1996            TSO IX
4-96                                     2-5-1996            260.05
5-96                                     2-5-1996            260.06
10-96                                    2-17-1996           TSO IV
13-96                                    3-4-1996            240.01
                                                             1064.01–
11-96                                    4-1-1996            1064.16,
                                                             1064.99
9-96                                     4-15-1996           TSO IX
13A-96                                   4-15-1996           220.02
18-96                                    4-15-1996           240.04
20-96                                    7-15-1996           TSO IX
28-96                                    8-5-1996            1460.01–
                                                             1460.03
29-96                                    8-19-1996           628.01–
                                                             628.05
36-96                                    12-2-1996           TSO IX
3-97                                     1-20-1997           260.13
7-97                                     3-17-1997           238.04
11-97                                    4-21-1997           TSO III
12-97                                    4-21-1997           TSO III
14-97                                    4-21-1997           1044.02
20-97                                    7-22-1997           240.05
32-97                                    7-22-1997           TSO IV
34-97                                    7-22-1997           TSO IV
29-97                                    8-4-1997            1042.13
30-97                                    8-18-1997           TSO I
39-97                                    1-20-1998           TSO IX
2-98                                     2-2-1998            236.02
3-98                                     2-2-1998            242.06
5-98                                     2-16-1998           220.01
7-98                                     3-2-1998            TSO IX
                                                             260.03,
                                                             260.10–
9-98                                     3-2-1998            260.12,
                                                             260.19,
                                                             260.22–
                                                             260.24
13-98                                    3-16-1998           260.04
14-98                                    3-16-1998           1424.05
20-98                                    6-15-1998           TSO IX
21-98                                    6-15-1998           TSO IX
22-98                                    6-15-1998           TSO IX
31-98                                    6-15-1998           TSO IX
24-98                                    7-6-1998            1260.09
26-98                                    7-6-1998            1270.03
32-98                                    7-6-1998            1272.03
55-98                                    11-2-1998           204.02
64-98                                    11-2-1998           TSO IX
52-98                                    11-16-1998          1042.08
69-98                                    1-4-1999            TSO III
3-99                                     3-1-1999            1042.19
10-99                                    3-15-1999           234.07
13-99                                    4-19-1999           648.17
16-99                                    4-19-1999           234.06
7-99                                     6-7-1999            1278.02
8-99                                     6-7-1999            1274.02
21-99                                    6-8-1999            204.03
24-99                                    6-21-1999           1262.08
26-99                                    6-21-1999           1442.02
27-99                                    6-21-1999           1042.05
30-99                                    7-6-1999            1042.22
                                                             1028.01–
35-99                                    7-19-1999           1028.03,
                                                             1028.99
39-99                                    7-19-1999           260.25
36-99                                    8-2-1999            TSO IX
43-99                                    8-2-1999            TSO III
44-99                                    9-7-1999            TSO III
47-99                                    9-20-1999           TSO V
48-99                                    9-20-1999           TSO III
49-99                                    9-20-1999           TSO IX
53-99                                    10-18-1999          406.01
52-99                                    11-1-1999           1268.03
60-99                                    11-15-1999          204.04,
                                                             204.99
66-99                                    1-3-2000            220.04
                                                             248.01,
                                                             248.03–
4-2000                                   2-7-2000            248.05,
                                                             1424.04,
                                                             1472.07
1-2000                                   2-22-2000           274.02
7-2000                                   4-3-2000            TSO III
12-2000                                  4-17-2000           854.99
13-2000                                  4-17-2000           TSO IX
14-2000                                  4-18-2000           TSO IX
23-2000                                  6-19-2000           608.16
29-2000                                  7-3-2000            TSO IV
41-2000                                  9-18-2000           286.01
54-2000                                  11-6-2000           220.01
61-2000                                  12-4-2000           1492.03
65-2000                                  12-18-2000          242.04
66-2000                                  12-18-2000          246.02
67-2000                                  12-18-2000          252.01–
                                                             252.04
68-2000                                  12-18-2000          244.01–
                                                             244.03
74-2000                                  1-2-2001            1042.08–
                                                             1042.12
78-2000                                  1-16-2001           204.03
1-2001                                   2-5-2001            258.01–
                                                             258.05
60-2000                                  2-5-2001            1282.03,
                                                             1286.02
2-2001                                   2-20-2001           260.25
3-2001                                   2-20-2001           TSO III
8-2001                                   3-5-2001            220.01
12-2001                                  4-2-2001            220.05,
                                                             220.06
11-2001                                  4-16-2001           660.07
14-2001                                  4-16-2001           234.08
15-2001                                  4-16-2001           1280.02
16-2001                                  5-8-2001            1050.02
17-2001                                  5-21-2001           TSO III
27-2001                                  5-21-2001           260.25
32-2001                                  7-2-2001            260.25
                                                             1050.01–
33-2001                                  8-20-2001           1050.05,
                                                             1050.99
35-2001                                  9-4-2001            TSO VI
37-2001                                  10-1-2001           624.03
38-2001                                  10-1-2001           TSO III
39-2001                                  10-1-2001           TSO III
40-2001                                  10-1-2001           TSO III
42-2001                                  11-19-2001          TSO III
55-2001                                  2-19-2002           TSO IX
4-2002                                   3-4-2002            TSO IV
8-2002                                   3-4-2002            238.04
2-2002                                   3-18-2002           TSO IX
5-2002                                   3-18-2002           TSO III
6-2002                                   3-18-2002           TSO III
7-2002                                   3-18-2002           TSO III
51-2001                                  3-18-2002           1266.01,
                                                             1266.13
52-2001                                  3-18-2002           1269.01–
                                                             1269.04
20-2002                                  5-6-2002            238.04
24-2002                                  5-6-2002            1022.04
13-2002                                  5-20-2002           TSO III
14-2002                                  5-20-2002           1474.01
16-2002                                  5-20-2002           220.03
28-2002                                  5-20-2002           678.09
12-2002                                  6-17-2002           TSO IX
34-2002                                  6-17-2002           234.03
21-2002                                  7-17-2002           TSO IX
35-2002                                  8-5-2002            TSO IX
39-2002                                  8-19-2002           220.01
48-2002                                  11-4-2002           1044.04
54-2002                                  12-2-2002           1050.04
1-2003                                   2-3-2003            258.01–
                                                             258.05
6-2003                                   2-3-2003            TSO IV
2-2003                                   2-18-2003           204.03
3-2003                                   2-18-2003           220.03
4-2003                                   2-18-2003           246.01
7-2003                                   3-3-2003            242.06
9-2003                                   3-3-2003            236.03
11-2003                                  3-17-2003           TSO VII
17-2003                                  4-7-2003            238.04
18-2003                                  5-5-2003            204.01
15-2003                                  5-19-2003           232.02
19-2003                                  6-2-2003            236.04
20-2003                                  6-2-2003            242.01
26-2003                                  6-16-2003           TSO IV
                                                             662.01–
24-2003                                  7-21-2003           662.06,
                                                             662.99
28-2003                                  8-4-2003            1044.07
29-2003                                  8-18-2003           TSO IX
33-2003                                  9-2-2003            242.02
40-2003                                  9-15-2003           TSO IX
39-2003                                  10-20-2003          220.02
47-2003                                  10-20-2003          TSO IV
45-2003                                  11-3-2003           TSO VII
49-2003                                  12-1-2003           1050.02
51-2003                                  12-15-2003          234.01
                                                             260.09,
                                                             260.10,
                                                             260.12,
60-2003                                  12-15-2003          260.13,
                                                             260.22,
                                                             260.25–
                                                             260.27
6-2004                                   1-20-2004           TSO IV
67-2003                                  1-20-2004           TSO IX
68-2003                                  1-20-2004           TSO IX
                                                             1240.03,
                                                             1244.04,
                                                             1244.05,
1-2004                                   2-2-2004            1246.04,
                                                             1248.01,
                                                             1248.03,
                                                             1248.06,
                                                             Subdiv. Appx VII
5-2004                                   5-2-2004            TSO IX
10-2004                                  5-3-2004            TSO III
13-2004                                  5-17-2004           TSO IV
14-2004                                  5-17-2004           1044.02
15-2004                                  5-17-2004           1248.03
16-2004                                  5-17-2004           660.14
17-2004                                  5-17-2004           TSO IV
23-2004                                  7-19-2004           TSO III
24-2004                                  8-16-2004           TSO III
31-2004                                  9-7-2004            TSO V
28-2004                                  9-20-2004           1050.02
29-2004                                  9-20-2004           TSO IV
42-2004                                  12-6-2004           260.01
43-2004                                  12-20-2004          880.01–
                                                             880.13
1-2005                                   1-3-2005            TSO VI
46-2004                                  1-18-2005           TSO V
2-2005                                   2-11-2005           258.01,
                                                             258.02
3-2005                                   2-22-2005           856.01–
                                                             856.04
4-2005                                   2-22-2005           TSO V
6-2005                                   3-7-2005            260.02
7-2005                                   3-7-2005            220.03
9-2005                                   3-7-2005            434.03
13-2005                                  5-2-2005            1042.06
14-2005                                  5-2-2005            1248.03
18-2005                                  6-6-2005            1050.02
26-2005                                  7-5-2005            678.09
28-2005                                  7-5-2005            TSO III
22-2005                                  7-18-2005           236.05
23-2005                                  7-18-2005           232.03
33-2005                                  8-1-2005            TSO V
38-2005                                  11-7-2005           276.01
42-2005                                  11-7-2005           1042.10
53-2005                                  11-21-2005          276.04
44-2005                                  12-5-2005           TSO III
46-2005                                  12-5-2005           260.13
47-2005                                  12-5-2005           880.07
48-2005                                  12-5-2005           880.03
49-2005                                  12-5-2005           880.09
62-2005                                  12-5-2005           TSO IX
55-2005                                  12-12-2005          236.04
54-2005                                  12-19-2005          242.01
56-2005                                  12-19-2005          204.05
40-2005                                  12-29-2005          1424.05
60-2005                                  1-17-2006           208.01–
                                                             208.03
3-2006                                   3-20-2006           240.04
6-2006                                   4-3-2006            406.01
9-2006                                   4-17-2006           TSO IX
13-2006                                  5-15-2006           1422.01
12-2006                                  6-5-2006            1050.02
16-2006                                  8-3-2006            TSO IX
29-2006                                  10-20-2006          TSO IX
                                                             662.01–
26-2006                                  11-6-2006           662.06,
                                                             662.99
30-2006                                  11-20-2006          434.03
37-2006                                  2-5-2007            1271.01–
                                                             1271.04
                                                             258.01,
1-2007                                   2-5-2007            258.03,
                                                             258.04
4-2007                                   4-16-2007           1266.13
6-2007                                   5-7-2007            880.07
7-2007                                   5-21-2007           TSO IX
10-2007                                  6-18-2007           TSO IX
                                                             1040.01–
11-2007                                  6-18-2007           1040.11,
                                                             1040.99
14-2007                                  7-16-2007           TSO IX
20-2007                                  7-16-2007           TSO IV
18-2007                                  8-6-2007            TSO III
31-2007                                  9-4-2007            220.01
30-2007                                  9-17-2007           1292.02
2-2008                                   1-22-2008           660.14
1-2008                                   2-19-2008           290.01–
                                                             290.04
5-2008                                   3-3-2008            662.01
3-2008                                   3-17-2008           220.01
6-2008                                   4-7-2008            452.14,
                                                             452.15
14-2008                                  5-5-2008            1050.02
8-2008                                   5-19-2008           TSO III
9-2008                                   5-19-2008           890.01
18-2008                                  6-2-2008            TSO IV
19-2008                                  7-7-2008            660.10
21-2008                                  7-7-2008            1476.03
26-2008                                  8-4-2008            1490.08–
                                                             1490.15
31-2008                                  9-15-2008           1050.02
34-2008                                  9-15-2008           TSO IV
33-2008                                  10-20-2008          220.01
48-2008                                  1-20-2009           204.03
1-2009                                   2-2-2009            258.01,
                                                             258.02
4-2009                                   3-2-2009            258.06
7-2009                                   3-2-2009            TSO IX
8-2009                                   3-2-2009            TSO IV
11-2009                                  5-4-2009            1044.02
15-2009                                  6-1-2009            618.17,
                                                             618.18
16-2009                                  6-1-2009            618.01
14-2009                                  6-15-2009           TSO IX
20-2009                                  6-15-2009           289.01—
                                                             289.04
21-2009                                  7-6-2009            434.03
26-2009                                  9-8-2009            1052.01
29-2009                                  8-24-2009           TSO III
34-2009                                  9-21-2009           434.03
42-2009                                  11-2-2009           TSO III
43-2009                                  11-2-2009           TSO III
45-2009                                  12-21-2009          210.01–
                                                             210.08
46-2009                                  12-21-2009          230.03
51-2009                                  1-4-2010            212.01–
                                                             212.04
2-2010                                   2-1-2010            TSO VII
3-2010                                   3-15-2010           TSO VII
                                                             1470.01–
9-2010                                   6-21-2010           1470.14,
                                                             1470.99
                                                             1468.01–
10-2010                                  6-21-2010           1468.07,
                                                             1468.99
11-2010                                  4-5-2010            TSO IV
12-2010                                  6-7-2010            208.03
13-2010                                  8-2-2010            TSO IX
15-2010                                  8-2-2010            278.04
19-2010                                  9-7-2010            618.01
20-2010                                  10-4-2010           662.02
21-2010                                  10-4-2010           230.05
24-2010                                  10-18-2010          230.06
25-2010                                  10-18-2010          668.01–
                                                             668.06
26-2010                                  10-18-2010          838.01–
                                                             838.20
28-2010                                  12-6-2010           1260.09
29-2010                                  12-6-2010           1278.03
30-2010                                  5-3-2011            Charter
32-2010                                  1-3-2011            1044.07
38-2010                                  12-20-2010          TSO III
41-2010                                  12-6-2010           TSO III
44-2010                                  2-22-2011           236.02
45-2010                                  2-22-2011           242.06
1-2011                                   2-7-2011            258.01 -
                                                             258.04
                                                             1466.01 -
4-2011                                   3-7-2011            1466.26,
                                                             1466.99
11-2011                                  6-6-2011            220.01
                                                             1462.03,
12-2011                                  6-20-2011           1462.07,
                                                             1462.13,
                                                             1462.14
13-2011                                  11-8-2011           Charter
18-2011                                  6-20-2011           624.16
19-2011                                  11-8-2011           Charter
20-2011                                  7-5-2011            220.03
23-2011                                  9-19-2011           TSO IX
29-2011                                  12-19-2011          1060.02
33-2011                                  11-7-2011           206.02
35-2011                                  11-21-2011          1486.09
40-2011                                  12-19-2011          276.04
41-2011                                  12-5-2011           434.03
42-2011                                  1-2-2012            1470.06
1-2012                                   1-2-2012            220.01
                                                             1480.01–
4-2012                                   5-7-2012            1480.27,
                                                             1480.99
5-2012                                   6-4-2012            TSO IX
                                                             1482.01–
9-2012                                   6-4-2012            1482.09,
                                                             1482.99
14-2012                                  9-17-2012           278.01
15-2012                                  9-17-2012           276.04
17-2012                                  9-4-2012            1040.04
18-2012                                  9-4-2012            1044.02
19-2012                                  9-17-2012           TSO IX
23-2012                                  11-5-2012           1282.03
26-2012                                  12-5-2012           TSO III
30-2012                                  1-7-2013            TSO IX
2-2013                                2-4-2013            258.01
5-2013                                3-4-2013            TSO III
8-2013                                   4-1-2013            1040.04
12-2013                                  3-4-2013            TSO IV
13-2013                                  4-1-2013            236.06
14-2013                                  4-15-2013           276.04
17-2013                                  4-15-2013           220.01
18-2013                                  4-15-2013           624.16
22-2013                                  6-17-2013           TSO VII
23-2013                                  5-20-2013           662.02
24-2013                                  7-1-2013            214.01,
                                                             214.02
25-2013                                  11-5-2013 by voters Ed. Note,
                                                             Ch. 880
26-2013                                  8-5-2013            238.01
29-2013                                  8-18-2013           1064.02
30-2013                                  8-5-2013            434.03
34-2013                                  11-4-2013           1040.04
37-2013                                  12-2-2013           1042.22
38-2013                                  12-16-2013          1274.02
39-2013                                  12-16-2013          1276.02
40-2013                                  12-16-2013          1278.02
                                                             1022.01–
46-2013                                  1-6-2014            1022.04,
                                                             1022.99
50-2013                                  12-16-2013          1050.02
1-2014                                   5-5-2014            220.01
                                                             1466.04,
2-2014                                   3-3-2014            1466.09,
                                                             1466.12
3-2014                                   3-17-2014           TSO III
8-2014                                   5-19-2014           880.11
10-2014                                  4-21-2014           TSO VI
11-2014                                  6-2-2014            1044.07
13-2014                                  7-7-2014            TSO III
14-2014                                  7-21-2014           236.07
15-2014                                  9-2-2014            442.10
17-2014                                  10-6-2014           1044.07
19-2014                                  11-17-2014          1060.02
                                                             1488.01-
                                                             1488.09,
20-2014                                  2-17-2015           1488.99, Ch. 1488
                                                             Appx. A,
                                                             Appx. B
22-2014                                  12-15-2014          880.10
23-2014                                  1-5-2015            TSO III
26-2014                                  1-20-2015           TSO VI
27-2014                                  2-17-2015           276.04
1-2015                                   2-2-2015            258.01–
                                                             258.04
7-2015                                   3-16-2015           1050.02
12-2015                                  5-18-2015           208.03
16-2015                                  11-3-2015            
                                        by voters           Charter
20-2015                                  6-15-2015           1468.02,
                                                             1468.06
24-2015                                  8-3-2015            236.04
25-2015                                  8-3-2015            242.01
26-2015                                  8-17-2015           TSO III
27-2015                                  7-20-2015           TSO IV
31-2015                                  9-8-2015            1050.02
32-2015                                  9-21-2015           TSO V
                                                             881.01–
50-2015                                  12-21-2015          881.26,
                                                             881.99
1-2016                                   2-1-2016            222.02
2-2016                                   3-7-2016            234.09
3-2016                                   3-7-2016            214.03
4-2016                                   2-1-2016            TSO VI
5-2016                                   4-18-2016           1276.03
6-2016                                   4-4-2016            1042.02
7-2016                                   4-4-2016            234.10
8-2016                                   4-4-2016            230.07
10-2016                                  5-16-2016           240.06
15-2016                                  7-5-2016            276.04
16-2016                                  7-18-2016           224.01 -
                                                             224.15
17-2016                                  7-18-2016           278.04
19-2016                                  8-15-2016           1062.07
20-2016                                  10-3-2016           1292.02
24-2016                                  10-3-2016           238.04
25-2016                                  10-3-2016           1050.06,
                                                             1050.07
27-2016                                  12-5-2016           276.04
28-2016                                  12-5-2016           1040.04
29-2016                                  12-5-2016           1044.08
30-2016                                  12-5-2016           1050.04
34-2016                                  12-19-2016          881.04,
                                                             881.05
35-2016                                  1-17-2017           TSO V
2-2017                                   2-6-2017            258.01
3-2017                                   2-21-2017           260.09
4-2017                                   2-21-2017           276.04
6-2017                                   4-3-2017            276.04
7-2017                                   4-17-2017           TSO III
9-2017                                   5-15-2017           1050.02
11-2017                                  6-19-2017           1044.07
14-2017                                  6-19-2017           1040.04
16-2017                                  9-5-2017            TSO V
17-2017                                  7-3-2017            TSO V
18-2017                                  8-7-2017            278.04
19-2017                                  8-7-2017            608.20
20-2017                                  8-7-2017            608.21
22-2017                                  8-7-2017            238.01
25-2017                                  10-16-2017          276.04 -
                                                             276.09
                                                             1042.02,
27-2017                                  12-4-2017           1042.12 -
                                                             1042.14,
                                                             1042.23
3-2018                                   4-2-2018            881.27 -
                                                             881.43
5-2018                                   5-21-2018           238.01
7-2018                                   7-16-2018           TSO IX
9-2018                                   6-18-2018           TSO III
10-2018                                  6-18-2018           1050.02
12-2018                                  7-16-2018           678.15
                                                             1054.01 to
14-2018                                  9-4-2018            1054.27,
                                                             1054.99
16-2018                                  9-4-2018            1042.05
22-2018                                  10-15-2018          276.04
23-2018                                  10-15-2018          678.17
25-2018                                  11-19-2018          TSO III
26-2018                                  1-7-2019            TSO IX
28-2018                                  11-19-2018          881.06
31-2018                                  1-7-2019            625.01,
                                                             625.02
32-2018                                  1-7-2019            1296.17
35-2018                                  1-22-2019           1028.01
1-2019                                   2-4-2019            258.01–
                                                             258.04
4-2019                                   2-4-2019            TSO VI
9-2019                                   5-6-2019            246.01–
                                                             246.07
12-2019                                  6-17-2019           1050.02
                                                             1240.09,
                                                             1244.02,
13-2019                                  7-15-2019           1244.04,
                                                             1244.05,
                                                             1248.03,
                                                             Subdiv. Appx. VI
                                                             1024.01–
14-2019                                  7-1-2019            1024.07,
                                                             1024.99
17-2019                                  7-15-2019           TSO III
18-2019                                  8-5-2019            TSO IX
19-2019                                  8-5-2019            TSO VI
20-2019                                  8-5-2019            210.01–
                                                             210.09
22-2019                                  9-3-2019            238.01
27-2019                                  10-21-2019          276.04
28-2019                                  10-21-2019          276.10
                                                             1056.01–
29-2019                                  10-21-2019          1056.06,
                                                             1056.99
31-2019                                  11-4-2019           Repeals 292.02
36-2019                                  12-16-2019          TSO IX
                                                            
 
